


263

God and Immortality
THE HUMAN SOUL is contained in the nerves of the 
body; about their physical nature I, as a layman, cannot say 
more than that they are extraordinarily delicate structures— 
comparable to the finest filaments—and that the total mental 
life of a human being rests on their excitability by external im- 
pressions. Vibrations are thereby caused in the nerves which 
produce the sensations of pleasure and pain in a manner which 
cannot be further explained; they are able to retain the mem- 
ory of impressions received (the human memory) and have 
also the power of moving the muscles of the body which they 
inhabit into any manifest activity by exertion of their will 
power. From the most tender beginnings (as the fruit of the 
womb—as a child's soul) they develop to a complex system 
which embraces the most widespread regions of human knowl- 
edge (the soul of mature man). Part of the nerves is adapted 
solely for receiving sensory impressions (nerves of sight, hear- 
ing, taste and voluptuousness, etc., which are therefore only 
capable of the sensation of light, sound, heat and cold, of the




MEMOIRS
feeling of hunger, voluptuousness and pain, etc.); other nerves 
(the nerves of intellect | receive and retain mental impressions 
and as the organs of will, give to the whole human organism 
the impulse to manifest those of its powers designed to act on 
the outside world. Circumstances seem to be such that every 
single nerve of intellect represents the total mental individu- 
ality of a human being, that the sum total of recollections is 
as it were inscribed on each single nerve of intellect;^ the 
greater or lesser number of nerves of intellect only influences 
the length of time for which recollections can be retained. 
While man is alive he is body and soul together; the nerves 
(the soul of man) are nourished and kept in living motion by 
the body whose function is essentially similar to that of the 
higher animals. Should the body lose its vitality then the state 
of unconsciousness, which we call death and which is pre- 
saged in sleep, supervenes for the nerves. This, however, does 
not imply that the soul is really extinguished; rather the im- 
pressions received remain attached to the nerves. The soul, as 
it were, only goes into hibernation as some lower animals do 
and can be re-awakened to a new life in a manner to be de- 
scribed below.
   God to start with is only nerve, not body, and akin therefore 
to the human soul. But unlike the human body, where nerves



God and Immortality
are present only in limited numbers, the nerves of God are infi- 
nite and eternal. They possess the same qualities as human 
nerves but in a degree surpassing all human understanding. 
They have in particular the faculty of transforming themselves 
into all things of the created world; in this capacity they are 
called rays; and herein lies the essence of divine creation. An 
intimate relation exists between God and the starry sky. I dare 
not decide whether one can simply say that God and the heav- 
enly bodies are one and the same, or whether one has to think 
of the totality of God's nerves as being above and behind the 
stars, so that the stars themselves and particularly our sun 
would only represent stations, through which God's miracu- 
lous creative power travels to our earth (and perhaps to other 
inhabitated planets).'
   Equally I dare not say whether the celestial bodies them- 
selves (fixed stars, planets, etc.) were created by God, or 
whether divine creation is limited to the organic world; in 
which case there would be room for the Nebular Hypothesis of 
Kant-Laplace side by side with the existence of a living God 
whose existence has become absolute certainty for me. Per- 
haps the full truth lies (by way of a fourth dimension) in a 
combination or resultant of both trends of thought impossible 
for man to grasp. In any case the light and warmth-giving 
power of the sun, which makes her the origin of all organic life 
on earth, is only to be regarded as an indirect manifestation of 
the living God; hence the veneration of the sun as divine by so 
many peoples since antiquity contains a highly important core 
of truth even if it does not embrace the whole truth.
   The teaching of present-day astronomy about the move- 
ments, the distances and the physical properties of the celes- 
tial bodies, etc., may in the main be correct. My own personal



MEMOIRS
experiences leave me in doubt however whether even the as- 
tronomy of today has grasped the whole truth about the light- 
and warmth-giving power of the stars and particularly of our 
sun; perhaps one has to consider her directly or indirectly only 
as that part of God's miraculous creative power which is di- 
rected to the earth. As proof of this statement I will at present 
only mention the fact that the sun has for years spoken with 
me in human words and thereby reveals herself as a living be- 
ing or as the organ of a still higher being behind her. God also 
regulates the weather; as a rule this is done automatically, so 
to speak, by the greater or lesser amount of heat emanating 
from the sun, but He can regulate it in certain ways in pursuit 
of His own purposes. For instance I have received fairly defi- 
nite indications that the severe winter of 1870-71 was decided 
on by God in order to turn the fortunes of war in favor of the 
Germans; and the proud words on the destruction of Phillip II's 
Spanish Armada in the year 1588 "Deus afflavit et dissipati 
sunt" (God blew the wind and they were scattered) most prob- 
ably also contains a historical truth. In this connection I refer 
to the sun only as that instrument of God's will power which 
lies nearest to the earth; in reality the condition of the weather 
is affected by the sum total of the other stars as well. Winds or 
storms in particular arise when God moves further away from 
the earth. In the circumstances contrary to the Order of the 
World which have now arisen this relation has changed—and I 
wish to mention this at the outset—the weather is now to a 
certain extent dependent on my actions and thoughts; as soon 
as I indulge in thinking nothing, or in other words stop an ac- 
tivity which proves the existence of the human mind such as 
playing chess in the garden the wind arises at once. To any- 
body who is inclined to doubt such a fantastic statement, I 
could almost daily give the opportunity of convincing him of 
its correctness, as in fact I have recently convinced various 
people about the so-called attacks of bellowing (the doctor, my




God and Immortality
wife, my sister, etc.). The reason for this is simply that as soon 
as I indulge in thinking nothing God, presuming that I am de- 
mented, thinks he can withdraw from me.
   Through the light emanating from the sun and the other 
stars, God is able to perceive (man would say: to see) every- 
thing that happens on earth and possibly on other inhabited 
planets; in this sense one can speak figuratively of the sun and 
light of the stars as the eye of God. All He sees He enjoys as 
the fruits of His creative power, much as a human being is 
pleased with what he has created with his hands or with his 
mind. Yet things were so ordered—up to the crisis to be de- 
scribed later—that by and large God left the world which He 
had created and the organic life upon it (plants, animals, hu- 
man beings) to their own devices and only provided continu- 
ous warmth of the sun to enable them to maintain themselves 
and reproduce, etc. As a rule God did not interfere directly in 
the fate of peoples or individuals—I call this the state of affairs 
in accordance with the Order of the World. It could however 
occur now and then as an exception, but neither did nor could 
happen too frequently because to draw close to living mankind 
was connected with certain dangers even for God Himself—for 
reasons developed further below. For instance a particularly 
fervent prayer might in a special case induce God to give help 
by intervening with a miracle" or to shape the fate of whole 
nations (in war, etc.) by means of miracles. He was also able to 
get into contact (to form "nerve-contact with them" as the 
voices that speak to me call this process) with highly gifted 
people (poets, etc.), in order to bless them (particularly in 
dreams) with some fertilizing thoughts and ideas about the



MEMOIRS
beyond. But such "nerve-contact" was not allowed to become 
the rule, as already mentioned, because for reasons which can- 
not be further elucidated, the nerves of living human beings 
particularly when in a state of high-giade excitation, have 
such power of attraction for the nerves of God that He would 
not be able to free Himself from them again, and would thus 
endanger His own existence.'
   Regular contact between God and human souls occurred 
in the Order of the World only after death. There was no dan- 
ger for God in approaching corpses in order to draw their 
nerves, in which self-awareness was not extinct but quiescent, 
out of their bodies and up to Himself by the power of the rays, 
thereby awakening them to new heavenly life; self-awareness 
returned through the influence of the rays. The new life be- 
yond is the state of Blessedness to which the human soul 
could be raised. But this did not occur without prior puri- 
fication and sifting of the human nerves which required, ac- 
cording to the variable condition of the respective human 
souls, a shorter or longer time of preparation, and perhaps 
even certain intermediate stages. Only pure human nerves 
were of use to God—or if one prefers, in heaven—because it 
was their destiny to be attached to God Himself and ulti- 
mately to become in a sense part of Him as "forecourts of




God and Immortality
heaven.'"' The nerves of morally depraved men are blackened; 
morally pure men have white nerves; the higher a man's moral 
standard in life, the more his nerves become completely white 
or pure, an intrinsic property of God's nerves. A greater part of 
the nerves of morally depraved men is probably useless; this 
determines the various grades of states of Blessedness to 
which a human being can attain, and probably also the length 
of time for which self-awareness in the life beyond can be 
maintained. Nerves probably always have to undergo purifica- 
tion first, because it would be very difficult to find a human 
being completely free from sin, that is to say one whose nerves 
were never defiled by immoral behavior in his earlier life. Not 
even I can give an exact description of the process of purifica- 
tion; but I have received several valuable indications about it. 
It appears that the process of purification was connected with a 
feeling of an unpleasant task' for the souls, or perhaps of an un- 
comfortable sojourn in the underworld, which was necessary 
to purify them gradually.
   It may be justifiable to designate this in a sense as "punish- 
ment"; but it has to be distinguished from the human idea 
of punishment in that its purpose is not to do harm, but to 
provide a necessary preliminary for purification. The ideas of 
hell, hellfire, etc., current in most religions can be explained in



MEMOIRS
this way, but must be qualified in part. The souls to be 
purified learnt during purification the language spoken by 
God Himself, the so-called "basic language," a somewhat anti- 
quated but nevertheless powerful German, characterized par- 
ticularly by a wealth of euphemisms (for instance, reward in 
the reverse sense for punishment, poison for food, juice for 
venom, unholy for holy, etc. God Himself was called "concern- 
ing Him Who is and shall be"—meaning eternity—and was 
addressed as "Your Majesty's obedient servant"). Purification 
was called "testing"; souls which had not yet undergone the 
process of purification were not, as one would expect, called 
"non-tested souls," but the exact reverse, namely "tested 
souls," in accordance with the tendency to use euphemisms. 
The souls still undergoing the process of purification were 
variously graded as "Satans," "Devils," "Assistant Devils," 
"Senior Devils," and "Basic Devils"; the latter expression par- 
ticularly seems to point to an abode in the underworld. The 
"Devils," etc., when set down as "fleeting-improvised-men," 
had a peculiar color (perhaps carrot-red| and a peculiar offen- 
sive odor, which I experienced a number of times in the so- 
called Pierson Asylum in Coswig (which I heard called the 
Devil's Kitchen). For instance I saw Mr. v. W. and a Mr. von O., 
whom we had met in the East Coast resort Warnemünde, as 
Devils with peculiar red faces and red hands, and Mr. W. as a 
Senior Devil.
   I learnt that Judas Iscariot had been a Basic Devil for his be- 
trayal of Jesus Christ. But one must not imagine these Devils 
as powers inimical to God as in the ideas of the Christian 
religion, for almost without exception they had already be- 
come thoroughly God-fearing, although they were still under- 
going the process of purification. The above statement that 
God used the German language in the form of the so-called 
"basic language," is not to be understood as though the state of 
Blessedness was reserved only for Germans. Nevertheless the



God and Immortality
Germans were in modern tim.es (possibly since the Refor- 
mation, perhaps ever since the migration of nations) God's 
chosen people whose language God preferred to use. In this 
sense God's chosen peoples in history—as the most moral at 
a given time—were in order the old Jews, the old Persians 
(these in an outstanding degree, about whom more will be 
said below), the "Greco-Romans" (perhaps in ancient Greece 
and Rome, perhaps also as the "Franks" at the time of the 
Crusades) and lastly the Germans. God readily understood the 
languages of all nations by contact with their nerves."
   The transmigration of souls also seems to have served 
the purpose of purifying human souls and was widespread, as 
a number of experiences lead me to believe. In this process 
the human souls concerned were called to a new human life 
on other planets, presumably by being born in the manner 
of a human being, perhaps retaining some dim memory of 
their earlier existence. I dare not say anything more definite 
about this, nor whether the transmigration of souls served 
only the purposes of purification or other purposes as well 
(the populating of other planets?). From the voices that speak 
to me, as well as in other ways, I learnt of a number of 
persons to whom in after life a much lower station was allot- 
ted than they had held in the previous one, perhaps as a kind 
of punishment.
   Particularly noteworthy was the case of Mr. v. W., whose 
soul for a long time profoundly influenced my relation with 
God and therefore my personal fate, as Flechsig's soul does 
to this very day.' During my stay in Pierson's Asylum (the



MEMOIRS
"Devil's Kitchen"), von W. held there the position of senior 
attendant—not as a real human being but, as I thought then 
and think still, as a "fleeting-improvised-man," that is to say 
as a soul temporarily given human shape by divine miracle. He 
was said to have already led a second life as the "Insurance 
Agent Marx" on some other planet during the process of trans- 
migration of souls.
   Souls completely cleansed by the process of purification as- 
cended to heaven and so gained the state of Blessedness. This 
consisted of uninterrupted enjoyment combined with the con- 
templation of God. The idea of perpetual idleness is unbear- 
able for a human being, because man is accustomed to work 
and, as the proverb says, it is only work which makes life 
sweet for him. But one must remember that souls are different 
from human beings and therefore it is not permissible to gauge 
their feelings by human standards.'" Souls' greatest happiness 
lies in continual reveling in pleasure combined with recollec- 
tions of their human past. They were able to exchange their



God and Immortality
recollections and by means of divine rays—borrowed for this 
purpose, so to speak—obtain knowledge about the conditions 
of persons still living on earth in whom they were interested, 
their relatives, friends, etc., and probably even help raise them 
up after death to attain to the state of Blessedness. But the 
souls' own happiness was not clouded by learning of their rela- 
tives' unhappy state on earth. For although the souls could re- 
tain the memory of their own human past, they could not for 
any length of time retain new impressions which they received 
as souls. This natural tendency of souls to forget would soon 
have erased any new adverse impressions. There were grada- 
tions within the state of Blessedness according to the staying 
power which nerves concerned had achieved in their human 
life, and probably also according to the number of nerves 
which were deemed worthy of being raised to heaven.
   The male state of Blessedness was superior to the female 
state; the latter seems to have consisted mainly in an uninter- 
rupted feeling of voluptuousness. Further, the soul of a Goethe, 
a Bismarck, etc., is likely to have retained its self-consciousness 
(knowledge of its own identity) for centuries, while the soul of 
a child which died young, might only have preserved it for the 
same number of years as it had lived. It was granted to no hu- 
man soul to remain aware for all eternity of having been this 
or that human being. It was rather the ultimate destiny of all 
souls to merge with other souls, and integrate into higher 
entities, remaining aware only of being part of God ("fore- 
courts of heaven"). This shows that they did not perish—as far 
as this goes souls were granted eternal existence—it was a 
continued life but with a different awareness. Only a narrow- 
minded person would find this an imperfection in the state of 
Blessedness—compared with personal immortality in the 
sense of the Christian religion. What purpose could it have 
served the soul to remember the name it once bore among 
men and its earlier personal relationships, when not only its



MEMOIRS
children and grandchildren had long since gone to eternal rest, 
but numerous other generations had gone to their graves as 
well, and perhaps even the nation to which it once belonged 
had been struck off the roll of living nations. Thus while still 
in Flechsig's Asylum I became acquainted with rays—that is 
to say complexes of blessed human souls merged into higher 
entities—^belonging to the old Judaism ("Jehovah rays"), the 
old Persians ("Zoroaster rays"] and the old Germans ("Thor 
and Odin rays") among which certainly not a single soul re- 
mained with any awareness of the name under which it had be- 
longed to one or other of these peoples thousands of years ago."
   God Himself dwelt above the "forecourts of heaven"; He 
was also called the "posterior realms of God" in contradistinc- 
tion to these "anterior realms of God." The posterior realms 
of God were (and still are) subject to a peculiar division, a 
lower God (Ariman) and upper God (Ormuzd) being distin- 
guished. I know nothing more about the further significance of 
this partition,'^ except that the lower God (Ariman) seems to 
have felt attracted to nations of originally brunette race (the 
Semites) and the upper God to nations of originally blond 
race (the Aryan peoples). It is significant that a hint of this di- 
vision is found in the religious notions of many peoples. 
Identical with Ormuzd are Balder of the Germans, Bielebog 
(the white God) or Swantewit of the Slavs, Poseidon of the 
Greeks and Neptune of the Romans; identical with Ariman are



God and Immortality
Wodan (Odin) of the Germans, Czernebog (the black God) of 
the Slavs, Zeus of the Greeks and Jupiter of the Romans. I first 
heard of the lower and the upper God as Ariman and Ormuzd 
from the voices that talk to me at the beginning of July 1894 
(perhaps at the end of my first week in this Asylum); since 
then I have heard these names daily." This date coincided 
with the depletion of the anterior realms of God with which I 
had previously been in contact (perhaps from the middle of 
March 1894).
   The above picture of the nature of God and the continued 
existence of the human soul after death differs markedly in 
some respects from the Christian views on these matters. It 
seems to me that a comparison between the two can only favor 
the former. God was not omniscient and omnipresent in the 
sense that He continuously saw inside every individual living 
person, perceived every feeling of his nerves, that is to say at 
all times "tried his heart and reins." But there was no need for 
this because after death the nerves of human beings with all 
the impressions they had received during life lay bare before 
God's eye, so that an unfailingly just judgment could be 
reached as to whether they were worthy of being received into 
the realms of heaven. In any case it was always possible for 
God to get to know the inner person through nerve-contact, 
whenever the need arose. On the other hand the picture I have 
drawn lacks any of the features of severity, of purposeless cru- 
elty imprinted on some of the notions of the Christian and in a



MEMOIRS
still greater degree on those of other religions. The whole 
Order of the World therefore appears as a "miraculous struc- 
ture,'"" the suhlimity of which surpasses in my opinion all 
conceptions which in the course of history men and peoples 
have developed about their relation to God.
32



Crisis in God's realms?
Soul murder
THIS "MIRACULOUS STRUCTURE" has recently 
suffered a rent, intimately connected with my personal fate. 
But it is impossible even for me to present the deeper connec- 
tions in a way which human understanding can fully grasp. My 
personal experiences enable me to lift the veil only partially,- 
the rest is intuition and conjecture. I want to say by way of in- 
troduction that the leading roles in the genesis of this develop- 
ment, the first beginnings of which go back perhaps as far as 
the eighteenth century, were played on the one hand by the 
names of Flechsig and Schreber (probably not specifying any 
individual member of these families), and on the other by the 
concept of soul murder.
   To start with the latter: the idea is widespread in the folk- 
lore and poetry of all peoples that it is somehow possible to 
take possession of another person's soul in order to prolong 
one's life at another soul's expense, or to secure some other 
advantages which outlast death. One has only to think for 
example of Goethe's Faust, Lord Byron's Manfred, Weber's
33



MEMOIRS
Frieschütz, etc. Commonly, however, the main role is sup- 
posed to be played by the Devil, who entices a human being 
into selling his soul to him by means of a drop of blood, etc. 
for some worldly advantages; yet it is difficult to see what the 
Devil was to do with a soul so caught, if one is not to assume 
that torturing a soul as an end in itself gave the Devil special 
pleasure.
   Although the latter idea must be relegated to the realm of 
fable because the Devil as a power inimical to God does not 
exist at all according to the above, yet the wide dissemination 
of the legend motif of soul murder or soul theft gives food for 
thought; it is hardly likely that such ideas could have been 
formed by so many peoples without any basis in fact. The 
voices which talk to me have daily stressed ever since the 
beginning of my contact with God (mid-March 1894) the fact 
that the crisis that broke upon the realms of God was caused 
by somebody having committed soul muidei-, at first Flechsig 
was named as the instigator of soul murder but of recent times 
in an attempt to reverse the facts I myself have been "repre- 
sented" as the one who had committed soul murder. I therefore 
concluded that at one time something had happened between 
perhaps earlier generations of the Flechsig and Schreber fami- 
lies which amounted to soul murder; in the same way as 
through further developments, at the time when my nervous 
illness seemed almost incurable, I gained the conviction that 
soul murder had been attempted on me by somebody, albeit 
unsuccessfully.
   L'appetit vient en mangeant: it is therefore quite possible 
that after the first, more soul murders were committed on the 
souls of other people. I will leave open the question whether 
the first soul murder was really the moral responsibility of a 
human being; much of this remains mysterious. Originally 
perhaps it was a battle arising out of jealousy between souls al- 
ready departed from life. Both the Flechsigs and the Schrebers




Crisis in God's realms? . . .
belonged, it was said, to "the highest nobility of heaven"; the 
Schrebers had the particular title "Margraves of Tuscany and 
Tasmania," according to the souls' habit of adorning them- 
selves with high-sounding worldly titles from a kind of per- 
sonal vanity. Several names of both families are concerned: of 
the Flechsigs particularly Abraham Fürchtegott Flechsig, Pro- 
fessor Paul Theodor Flechsig, and a Daniel Fürchtegott Flechsig; 
the latter lived towards the end of the eighteenth century and 
was said to have been an "Assistant Devil" because of some- 
thing that had happened in the nature of a soul murder. 
However that may be, it is certain that I was in contact for 
some time with the nerves of Professor Paul Theodor Flechsig 
and of Daniel Fürchtegott Flechsig (whether with the former 
also in his quality as a soul?) and had parts of their souls in 
my body. The soul of Daniel Fürchtegott Flechsig vanished 
years ago (flitted away); part at least of Professor Paul Theodor 
Flechsig's soul (i.e. a certain number of nerves originally 
with the consciousness of Professor Paul Theodor Flechsig's 
identity, which however in the meantime had become very 
much reduced) still exists as a "tested soul" in heaven. The 
only knowledge I possess of the Flechsig family tree comes 
from what was said by the voices that talk to me; it would 
therefore be interesting to find out whether there had actually 
been a Daniel Fürchtegott Flechsig and an Abraham Fürch- 
tegott Flechsig among the forebears of the present Professor 
Flechsig.
   I presume that at one time a bearer of the name Flechsig— 
a human being carrying that name—succeeded in abusing 
nerve-contact granted him for the purpose of divine inspiration 
or some other reasons, in order to retain his hold on the divine 
rays. This is naturally only an hypothesis, but as in scientific 
research it has to be adhered to until a better explanation for 
the events under investigation is found. It seems very probable 
that contact with divine nerves was granted to a person who




MEMOIRS
specialized in nervous illnesses, partly because he would be ex- 
pected to be a highly intellectual person, partly because every- 
thing concerning human nerves must be of particular interest 
to God, starting with His instinctive knowledge that an in- 
crease of nervousness among men could endanger His realms. 
Asylums for the mentally ill were therefore called in the basic 
language "God's Nerve-Institutes." If the above-mentioned 
Daniel Fürchtegott Flechsig was the first to offend against the 
Order of the World by abusing contact with divine nerves, this 
would not be contradicted absolutely by the same man being 
called a Country Clergyman by the voices that talk to me, be- 
cause at the time when Daniel Fürchtegott Flechsig was sup- 
posed to have lived—in the eighteenth century about the time 
of Frederick the Great"*—public Asylums for the insane were 
not yet in existence.
   One would therefore have to imagine that such a person, 
engaged in the practice of nervous diseases—having perhaps 
another profession besides—believed he had at some time 
seen miraculous visions in a dream and experienced miracu- 
lous things, which he felt an urge to investigate further, either 
out of ordinary human curiosity or keen scientific interest. He 
need not necessarily have known at the outset that he was in 
direct or indirect contact with God. He may have tried to 
recall these dream visions in subsequent nights and so have 
discovered that they really did return during sleep in the




Crisis in God's realms? . . .
same or perhaps slightly different form supplementing the 
earlier information. Naturally interest was heightened par- 
ticularly as the dreamer may have learnt that these communi- 
cations came from his own forebears, who lately had been out- 
stripped in some way or other by members of the Schreber 
family. He may then have tried to influence the nerves of 
his contemporaries by exerting his will power after the fashion 
of thought readers—such as Cumberland, etc.—and he may 
thus have found that this was possible to a certain extent. 
He may have resisted breaking off the contact into which 
divine rays had directly or indirectly entered with him, or 
made it dependent on conditions which could not be denied 
him, considering the souls' natural weakness of character 
compared with that of living men, and in any case it was 
not thought possible to keep up permanent nerve-contact 
with a single human being. One can imagine that in this way 
something like a conspiracy may have arisen between such 
a person and the elements of the anterior realms of God to 
the detriment of the Schreber race, perhaps in the direction 
of denying them offspring or possibly only of denying them 
choice of those professions which would lead to closer re- 
lations with God such as that of a nerve specialist. In view 
of what was said above about the constitution of the 
realms of God and the (limited) omnipresence of God, such 
events need not necessarily have come to the knowledge of 
the posterior realms of God immediately. The conspirators— 
to retain this expression—perhaps succeeded in silencing 
possible scruples about allowing nerve-contact to be made 
with members of the Schreber family in an unguarded mo- 
ment such as occurs sometime in everybody's life, in order 
also to convince the next higher instance of the hierarchy of 
God's realms that one Schreber soul more or less did not mat- 
ter in the face of danger threatening the very existence of the
37



MEMOIRS
realms of God." In this v>ray it may have come about that one 
did not im.mediately and resolutely oppose efforts inspired by 
ambition and lust for power, which could possibly lead to soul 
murder—if such a thing exist—that is to say to the surrender 
of a soul to another person perhaps for prolonging earthly life, 
for appropriating his mental powers, for attaining a kind of per- 
sonal immunity or some other advantage. On the other hand 
one may have underrated the danger even for the realms of 
God which this entailed. One felt so possessed of immense 
power that the possibility of one single human being ever be- 
coming a danger to God Himself was not taken into considera- 
tion. I have in fact not the least doubt from what I later learned 
and experienced of God's miraculous power that God— 
provided that conditions in accordance with the Order of the 
World prevailed—would at any time have been able to annihi- 
late an embarrassing human being by sending him a fatal ill- 
ness or striking him with lightning.
   Perhaps one did not think it necessary to proceed immedi- 
ately with the most drastic measures against the presumed 
soul murderer, while his trespass consisted at first only of 
abuse of contact with divine nerves, and the eventuality of 
soul murder seemed remote, and if the person's merit and 
moral conduct were such that it seemed unlikely that it would 
come to such an extremity. Apart from these hints I cannot en- 
large on the essential nature of soul murder or, so to speak, its 
technique. One might only add (the passage which follows is 
unfit for publication). I am sure that the person, whether it was 
the present Professor Flechsig or one of his forebears, who



Crisis in God's realms? . . .
must take the blame for being the original instigator of "soul 
murders," must have had some notion of the supernatural 
matters which I have now come to know, although he cer- 
tainly did not penetrate to a deeper knowledge of God and the 
Order of the World. It is inconceivable that anybody who has 
won a profound faith in God and the certainty that in any case 
he is definitely guaranteed a state of Blessedness commensu- 
rate with the purity of his nerves should think of violating 
other people's souls. It is equally unlikely that this should 
have happened in the case of a person who could be called reli- 
gious if only in the sense of our positive religion. I do not know 
what the present Professor Flechsig's attitude to religious mat- 
ters was or is. Should he be or have been, a doubter, as so 
many others are today, he could not be blamed, least of all by 
myself who, I must confess, belonged to that category myself 
until divine revelation taught me better.
   Whoever has taken the trouble of reading the above atten- 
tively may spontaneously have thought that God Himself 
must have been or be in a precarious position, if the conduct 
of a single human being could endanger Him in any way and 
if even He Himself, if only in lower instances," could be en- 
ticed into a kind of conspiracy against human beings who are



MEMOIRS
fundamentally innocent. Such an objection may not be alto- 
gether unjustified but I must not omit to add that my own 
faith in the grandeur and sublimity of God and the Order of the 
World was not shaken. Not even God Himself is or was a being 
of such absolute perfection as most religions attribute to Him. 
The power of attraction, this even to me unfathomable law, ac- 
cording to which rays and nerves mutually attract one another, 
harbors a kernel of danger for the realms of God; this forms 
perhaps the basis of the Germanic saga of the Twilight of the 
Gods. Growing nervousness among mankind could and can in- 
crease these dangers considerably. God, as already mentioned, 
saw living human beings only from without} as a rule His om- 
nipresence and omniscience did not extend within living man. 
Even God's eternal love existed only for creation as a whole. 
As soon as there is a clash of interests with individual human 
beings or nations (Sodom and Gomorrah for instance!) perhaps 
even with the whole population of a planet (through an in- 
crease of nervousness or immorality), the instinct of self- 
preservation must be aroused in God as in every other living 
being. Ultimately that of course is perfect which serves its 
own particular purpose, even if human imagination could pic- 
ture a still more ideal condition.™ This purpose was neverthe- 
less achieved: for God eternal joy at His creation, for human



Crisis in God's realms? . . .
beings the joy of life during their earthly existence, and after 
death the greatest happiness, the state of Blessedness. It is 
quite unthinkable that God would have denied any single hu- 
man being his share in the state of Blessedness as every in- 
crease o£ the "forecourts of heaven" could only serve to increase 
His own power and strengthen His defenses against the dan- 
gers of His approaching mankind. No clash of interests be- 
tween God and individual human beings could arise as long 
as the latter behaved according to the Order of the World. If 
despite this such a clash of interests arose in my case because 
of supposed soul murder, this can only be due to such a mar- 
velous concatination of events^' as probably never before hap- 
pened in the history of the world, and I hope will never happen 
again. Even in such an exttaoidinary case the Order of the 
World carries its own remedies for healing the wounds in- 
flicted upon it; the remedy is Eternity. Whilst I had earlier (for 
about two years) believed I had to assume and was forced 
by my experiences to assume, that if God were permanently 
tied to my person, all creation on earth would have to perish 
with the exception of some play-with-miracles in my immedi- 
ate surroundings, I have had reason lately to modify this idea 
considerably.
   Some people were made very unhappy; I may say that I my- 
self lived through cruel times and endured bitter sufferings. On 
the other hand six years of uninterrupted influx of God's 
nerves into my body has led to the total loss of all the states of 
Blessedness which had accumulated until then and made it 
impossible for the time being to renew them; the state of 
Blessedness is so to speak suspended and all human beings 
who have since died or will die can for the time being not at- 
tain to it. For God's nerves also it is unpleasant and against
4i



MEMOIRS
their will to enter into my body, shown by the continual cries 
for help which I daily hear in the sky from those parts of the 
nerves which have become separated from the total mass of 
nerves. All these losses can however be made good again 
insofar as an Eternity exists, even though total restoration of 
the previous state may take thousands of years.




(Not printed)
43
L



Personal experiences during the first and the beginning of the second 
nervous illness
I COME NOW to my personal fortunes during the two 
nervous illnesses which I have suffered. I have twice had a 
nervous illness, each time in consequence of mental over- 
strain; the first (while Chairman of the County Court of Chem- 
nitz | was occasioned by my candidature for parliament, the 
second by the extraordinary burden of work on taking up office 
as President of the Senate of a Court of Appeal in Dresden, to 
which I had been newly appointed.
   The first of the two illnesses commenced in the autumn of 
1884 and was fully cured at the end of 1885, so that I was able 
to resume work as Chairman of the County Court at Leipzig to 
which I had in the meantime been transferred on 1st January 
1886. The second nervous illness began in October 1893 and 
still continues. I spent the greater part of both illnesses in the 
Psychiatric Clinic of the University of Leipzig under the Direc- 
torship of Professor Flechsig, the first time from early De- 
cember 1884 to the beginning of June 1885, the second time 
from about the middle of November 1893 till about the middle




Personal experiences during the first . .
of June 1894. In each case when first I entered the Asylum I 
had not the faintest idea of an antagonism existing between 
the Schreber and Flechsig families, nor of the supernatural 
matters of which I have treated in the preceding chapters.
   The first illness passed without any occurrences bordering 
on the supernatural, and while it lasted I had on the whole 
only favorable impressions of Professor Flechsig's methods of 
treatment. Some mistakes may have been made. Even in the 
course of that illness I was and still am of the opinion that 
white lies, which a nerve specialist may perhaps not be able to 
dispense with altogether in the case of some mental patients, 
but which he must nevertheless employ only with the greatest 
circumspection, were hardly ever appropriate in my case, for 
he must soon have realized that in me he was dealing with a 
human being of high intellect, of uncommon keenness of un- 
derstanding and acute powers of observation. Yet I could only 
consider it a white lie when, for instance. Professor Flechsig 
wanted to put down my illness solely to poisoning with potas- 
sium bromide, for which Dr. R. in S., in whose care I had been 
before, was to be blamed. I believe I could have been more 
rapidly cured of certain hypochondriacal ideas with which I 
was preoccupied at the time, particularly concern over loss 
of weight, if I had been allowed to operate the scales which 
served to weigh patients a few times myself; the scales used 
in the University Clinic at the time were of a peculiar con- 
struction unfamiliar to me. All the same these are only minor 
points on which I place little importance; perhaps it is unrea- 
sonable to expect the Director of a big Asylum with hundreds 
of patients to concern himself in such detail with the mental 
state of a single patient. The main point was that I was eventu- 
ally cured (after a prolonged convalescence), and therefore I 
had at the time no reason to be other than most grateful to 
Professor Flechsig; I gave this special expression by a subse- 
quent visit and in my opinion an adequate honorarium. My




MEMOIRS
wife felt even more sincere gratitude and worshiped Professor 
Flechsig as the man who had restored her husband to her; for 
this reason she kept his picture on her desk for many years.
   After recovering from my first illness I spent eight years 
with my wife, on the whole quite happy ones, rich also in out- 
ward honors and marred only from time to time by the repeated 
disappointment of our hope of being blessed with children. In 
June 1893 I was informed (in the first place by the Minister of 
Justice, Dr. Schurig in person) of my impending appointment 
as Senatspiäsident to the Superior Court in Dresden.
   During this time I had several dreams to which I did not 
then attribute any particular significance, and which I would 
even today disregard as the proverb says "Dreams are mere 
shadows," had my experience in the meantime not made 
me think of the possibility at least of their being connected 
with the contact which had been made with me by divine 
nerves. I dreamt several times that my former nervous illness 
had returned; naturally I was as unhappy about this in the 
dream, as I felt happy on waking that it had only been a dream. 
Furthermore, one morning while still in bed (whether still 
half asleep or already awake I cannot remember), I had a feel- 
ing which, thinking about it later when fully awake, struck 
me as highly peculiar. It was the idea that it really must be 
rather pleasant to be a woman succumbing to intercourse. 
This idea was so foreign to my whole nature that I may say I 
would have rejected it with indignation if fully awake; from 
what I have experienced since I cannot exclude the possibility 
that some external influences were at work to implant this 
idea in me.
   On the 1st of October 1893 I took up office as Senatsprä- 
sident to the Superior Court in Dresden. I have already men- 
tioned the heavy burden of work I found there. I was driven, 
maybe by personal ambition, but certainly also in the interests 
of the office, to achieve first of all the necessary respect among



Personal experiences during the first . . .
my colleagues and others concerned with the Court (barristers, 
etc.) by unquestionable efficiency. The task was all the heavier 
and demanded all the more tact in my personal dealings with 
the members of the panel of five fudges over which I had to 
preside, as almost all of them were much senior to me (up to 
twenty years), and anyway they were much more intimately 
acquainted with the procedure of the Court, to which I was 
a newcomer. It thus happened that after a few weeks I had 
already overtaxed myself mentally. I started to sleep badly at 
the very moment when I was able to feel that I had largely 
mastered the difficulties of settling down in my new office and 
in my new residence, etc. I started taking sodium bromide. 
There was almost no opportunity for social distraction which 
would certainly have been very much better for me—this be- 
came evident to me when I slept considerably better after the 
only occasion on which we had been asked to a dinner party— 
but we hardly knew anybody in Dresden. The first really bad, 
that is to say almost sleepless nights, occurred in the last days 
of October or the first days of November. It was then that an 
extraordinary event occurred. During several nights when I 
could not get to sleep, a recurrent crackling noise in the wall of 
our bedroom became noticeable at shorter or longer intervals; 
time and again it woke me as I was about to go to sleep. 
Naturally we thought of a mouse although it was very extraor- 
dinary that a mouse should have found its way to the first 
floor of such a solidly built house. But having heard similar 
noises innumerable times since then, and still hearing them 
around me every day in day-time and at night, I have come to 
recognize them as undoubted divine miracles—they are called 
"interferences" by the voices talking to me—and I must at 
least suspect, without being too definite about it, that even 
then it was already a matter of such a miracle; in other words 
that right from the beginning the more or less definite inten- 
tion existed to prevent my sleep and later my recovery from
47



MEMOIRS
the illness lesulting from the insomnia far a purpose which 
cannot at this stage be further specified}^
  My illness now began to assume a menacing character; al- 
ready on the 8th or 9th of November Doctor Ö., whom I had 
consulted, made me take a week's sick leave, which we were 
going to use to consult Professor Flechsig, in whom we placed 
all our faith since his successful treatment of my first illness. 
Because it was a Sunday and Professor Flechsig would not be 
available, we (my wife and I) traveled via Chemnitz and spent 
the night from Sunday to Monday with my brother-in-law. 
That evening I was given an injection of morphine, and for the 
first time chloral during the night—^perhaps accidentally not 
in the dosage ordered right away; the previous evening I suf- 
fered as severely from palpitation as in my first illness, so that 
walking up only a moderate incline caused attacks of anxiety. 
The night in Chemnitz was also bad. Early the following day 
(Monday) we traveled to Leipzig and from the Bavarian Station 
by cab direct to Professor Flechsig at the University Clinic, 
having advised him of our visit the day before by telegram. A 
long interview followed in which I must say Professor Flechsig 
developed a remarkable eloquence which affected me deeply. 
He spoke of the advances made in psychiatry since my first 
illness, of newly discovered sleeping drugs, etc., and gave me 
hope of delivering me of the whole illness through one prolific 
sleep, which was to start if possible at three o'clock in the af- 
ternoon and last to the following day.
  My mood thereupon became steadier, also perhaps because



Personal experiences during the first . . .
traveling through the fresh morning air for several hours and 
the time of day (morning) might have strengthened my nerves 
a little. We went right away to the chemist to fetch the sleep- 
ing drug prescribed, then had a meal with my mother at her 
house, and I spent the rest of the day quite bearably, going for a 
little walk amongst other things. Naturally I did not get to bed 
(in my mother's house) as early as 3 o'clock, but (possibly ac- 
cording to some secret instruction which my wife had received) 
it was delayed until the 9th hour. More serious symptoms de- 
veloped again immediately before going to bed. Unfortunately 
the bed was cold because it had been aired too long, with the 
result that I was immediately seized by a severe rigor and was 
already in a state of great excitement when I took the sleeping 
drug. Because of this the sleeping drug failed almost entirely in 
its effect, and after one or more hours my wife also gave me 
the chloral hydrate which was kept at hand in reserve. Despite 
this I spent the night almost without sleep, and once even left 
the bed in an attack of anxiety in order to make preparations 
for a kind of suicidal attempt by means of a towel or suchlike; 
this woke my wife who stopped me. The next morning my 
nerves were badly shattered; the blood had gone from my ex- 
tremities to the heart, my mood was gloomy in the extreme 
and Professor Flechsig, who had been sent for early in the 
morning, therefore advised my admission into his Asylum, for 
which I set out immediately by cab accompanied by him.
   After a warm bath I was at once put to bed, which I did not 
leave again for the next 4 or 5 days. A certain R... was as- 
signed to me as attendant. My illness progressed rapidly during 
the following days; the nights passed mostly without sleep 
because the weaker sleeping drugs (camphor, etc.) which were 
tried first so as to avoid the permanent use of chloral hydrate 
from the beginning, failed to act. I could not occupy myself 
in any way; nor did I see anybody of my family. I passed the 
days therefore in endless melancholy; my mind was occupied



MEMOIRS
almost exclusively with thoughts of death. It seems to me in 
retrospect that Professor Flechsig's plan of curing me consisted 
in intensifying my nervous depression as far as possible, in 
order to bring about a cure all at once by a sudden change 
of mood. At least this is the only way I can explain the follow- 
ing event, which I could otherwise only attribute to malicious 
intent."
   About the fourth or fifth night after my admission to the 
Asylum, I was pulled out of bed by two attendants in the mid- 
dle of the night and taken to a cell fitted out for dements (ma- 
niacs) to sleep in. I was already in a highly excited state, in a 
fever delirium so to speak, and was naturally terrified in the 
extreme by this event, the reasons for which I did not know. 
The way led through the billiard room; there, because I had no 
idea what one intended to do with me and therefore thought I 
had to resist, a fight started between myself clad only in a 
shirt, and the two attendants, during which I tried to hold fast 
to the billiard table, but was eventually overpowered and re- 
moved to the above-mentioned cell. There I was left to my 
fate; I spent the rest of the night mostly sleepless in this cell, 
furnished only with an iron bedstead and some bedding. 
Regarding myself as totally lost, I made a naturally unsuccess- 
ful attempt during the night to hang myself from the bedstead 
with the sheet. I was completely ruled by the idea that there 
was nothing left for a human being for whom sleep could no 
longer be procured by all the means of medical art, but to take



Personal experiences during the first . . .
his life. I knew that this was not permitted in Asylums, but I 
labored under the delusion that when all attempts at cure had 
been exhausted, one would be discharged—solely for the pur- 
pose of making an end to one's life either in one's own home or 
somewhere else.
   I was therefore greatly surprised when on the following 
morning the doctor still came to see me. Professor Flechsig's 
Assistant Physician, Dr. Täuscher appeared, and told me that 
there was no intention whatsoever of giving up treatment; 
this, coupled with the manner in which he tried to raise my 
spirits again—I cannot deny him also my appreciation of the ex- 
cellent way he spoke to me on that occasion—had the effect of 
a very favorable change in my mood. I was led back to the room 
I had previously occupied and spent the best day of the whole 
of my (second) stay in Flechsig's Asylum, that is to say the 
only day on which I was enlivened by a joyful spirit of hope. 
Even the attendant R. behaved most tactfully and skillfully in 
his whole conservation, so that in retrospect I sometimes 
asked myself whether he also had received higher inspirations 
(in the same way as Dr. Täuscher). In the morning I even 
played billiards with him, had a hot bath in the afternoon and 
maintained my better mood until the evening. They were go- 
ing to see whether I could sleep entirely without sleeping 
drugs. Indeed I went to bed relatively calm, but could not get 
to sleep. After a few hours I could no longer remain calm,- the 
rush of blood to my heart again caused attacks of anxiety. After 
the change-over of attendants—an attendant sat constantly by 
my bed and was relieved by another in the middle of the 
night—something to make me sleep was eventually given— 
"Nekrin" or some such name—and I must have fallen asleep 
for a short while, which however no longer strengthened my 
nerves in any way. On the contrary my nerves were shattered 
again the following morning, indeed so badly that I vomited 
the breakfast. A particularly terrifying impression was created




MEMOIRS
in me by the totally distorted features which I thought I could 
see on the attendant R. when I awoke.
   From then on I was regularly given chloral hydrate every 
night, and the following weeks were at least outwardly a little 
calmer, because in this way moderate sleep was usually pro- 
cured. My wife visited me regularly and in the last two weeks 
before Christmas I spent part of every day at my mother's 
house. But the hyper-excitability of my nerves remained and 
got worse rather than better. In the weeks after Christmas I 
went for a drive every day with my wife and the attendant. But 
I was so weak that when I got out of the carriage (in Rosenthal 
or in Scheibenholz) every little distance of a few hundred paces 
seemed a hazard on which I could not decide without inner 
anxiety. In other respects too my whole nervous system was in 
a state of utter laxity. I could hardly, if at all, manage any intel- 
lectual occupation such as reading newspapers. Even mainly 
mechanical occupations such as jig-saw puzzles, patience and 
suchlike increased my nervous tension to such a degree that I 
usually had to stop after a short time,- I could scarcely even 
play a few games of checkers with the attendant R... in the 
evening. During that time I mostly ate and drank well, and was 
still in the habit of smoking several cigars a day. The laxity 
of my nerves increased with the simultaneous reappearance of 
states of anxiety, whenever they again tried giving me weaker 
sleeping drugs instead of chloral hydrate, which, although it 
strengthens the nerves temporarily, nevertheless damages them 
if used for any length of time. My will to live was completely 
broken; I could see nothing in the future but a fatal outcome, 
perhaps produced by committing suicide eventually; as to the 
plans for the future with which my wife tried again and again 
to raise my spirits, I could only shake my head in disbelief.
   A further decline in my nervous state and an important 
chapter in my life commenced about the 15th of February 1894 
when my wife, who until then had spent a few hours every day



Personal experiences during the first. . .
with me and had also taken lunch with me in the Asylum, un- 
dertook a four-day journey to her father in Berlin in order to 
have a holiday herself, of which she was in urgent need. My 
condition deteriorated so much in these four days that after 
her return I saw her only once more, and then declared that I 
could not wish my wife to see me again in the low state into 
which I had fallen. From then on my wife's visits ceased; when 
after a long time I did see her again at the window of a room 
opposite mine, such important changes had meanwhile oc- 
curred in my environment and in myself that I no longer 
considered her a living being, but only thought I saw in her a 
human form produced by miracle in the manner of the "fleet- 
ing-improvised-men." Decisive for my mental collapse was 
one particular night; during that night I had a quite unusual 
number of pollutions (perhaps half a dozen).
   From then on appeared the first signs of communication 
with supernatural powers, particularly that of nerve-contact 
which Professor Flechsig kept up with me in such a way that 
he spoke to my nerves without being present in person. From 
then on I also gained the impression that Professor Flechsig 
had secret designs against me; this seemed confirmed when I 
once asked him during a personal visit whether he really hon- 
estly believed that I could be cured, and he held out certain 
hopes, but could no longer—at least so it seemed to me—look 
me straight in the eye.
   I must now discuss the nature of the frequently mentioned 
inner voices which since then have spoken to me incessantly, 
and also of what in my opinion is the tendency innate in the 
Order of the World, according to which a human being ("a seer 
of spirits") must under certain circumstances be "unmanned" 
(transformed into a woman) once he has entered into indissol- 
uble contact with divine nerves (rays). The next chapter is 
devoted to an exposition of these circumstances; this is, how- 
ever, infinitely difficult.



Continuation.
Nerve-language (inner voices) 
Compulsive thinking.
Unmanning under certain 
circumstances a postulate of 
the Order of the World

APART FROM NORMAL human language there is also a 
kind of nerve-language of which, as a rule, the healthy human 
being is not aware. In my opinion this is best understood when 
one thinks of the processes by which a person tries to imprint 
certain words in his memory in a definite order, as for instance 
a child learning a poem by heart which he is going to recite at 
school, or a priest a sermon he is going to deliver in Church. 
The words are repeated silently (as in a silent prayer to which 
the congregation is called from the pulpit), that is to say a hu- 
man being causes his nerves to vibrate in the way which corre- 
sponds to the use of the words concerned, but the real organs 
of speech (lips, tongue, teeth, etc.) are either not set in motion 
at all or only coincidentally.
   Naturally under normal (in consonance with the Order of 
the World) conditions, use of this nerve-language depends only 
on the will of the person whose nerves are concerned; no 
human being as such can force another to use this nerve-




Continuation. Nerve-language . . .
language.^* In my case, however, since my nervous illness took 
the above-mentioned critical turn, my nerves have been set in 
motion from without incessantly and without any respite.
   Divine rays above all have the power of influencing the 
nerves of a human being in this manner; by this means God 
has always been able to infuse dreams into a sleeping human 
being. I myself first felt this influence as emanating from 
Professor Flechsig. The only possible explanation I can think 
of is that Professor Flechsig in some way knew how to put di- 
vine rays to his own use; later, apart from Professor Flechsig's 
nerves, direct divine rays also entered into contact with my 
nerves. This influence has in the course of years assumed 
forms more and more contrary to the Order of the World and 
to man's natural right to be master of his own nerves, and I 
might say become increasingly grotesque.
   This influence showed itself relatively early in the form of 
compulsive thinking—an expression which I received from the 
inner voices themselves and which will hardly be known to 
other human beings, because the whole phenomenon lies out- 
side all human experience. The nature of compulsive thinking 
lies in a human being having to think incessantly; in other 
words, man's natural right to give the nerves of his mind their 
necessary rest from time to time by thinking nothing (as oc- 
curs most markedly during sleep | was from the beginning 
denied me by the rays in contact with mc; they continually 
wanted to know what I was thinking about. For instance I was 
asked in these very words: "What are you thinking of now?"; 
because this question is in itself complete nonsense, as a hu- 
man being can at certain times as well think of nothing as of 
thousands of things at the same time, and because my nerves
55



MEMOIRS
did not react to this absurd question, one was soon driven to 
take refuge in a system of falsifying my thoughts. For instance 
the above question was answered spontaneously: "He should" 
scilicet think^' "about the Order of the World"; that is to say 
the influence of the rays forced my nerves to perforin the 
movements corresponding to the use of these words. The num- 
ber of points from which contact with my nerves originated in- 
creased with time: apart from Professor Flechsig, who was the 
only one whom for a time at least I knew definitely to be 
among the living, they were mostly departed souls who began 
more and more to interest themselves in me.
   In this connection I could mention hundreds if not thou- 
sands of names, many of which I learnt later, when some 
contact with the outside world was restored to me through 
newspapers and letters, were still among the living; whereas 
at the time, when as souls they were in contact with my 
nerves, I could only think they had long since departed this 
life. Many of the bearers of these names were particularly 
interested in religion, many were Catholics who expected a



Continuation. Nerve-language . . .
furtherance of Catholicism from the way I was expected to 
behave, particularly the Catholicizing of Saxony and Leipzig; 
amongst them were the Priest S. in Leipzig, "14 Leipzig 
Catholics" (of whom only the name of the Consul General 
D. was indicated to me, presumably a Catholic Club or its 
board). The Jesuit Father S. in Dresden, the Ordinary Arch- 
bishop in Prague, the Cathedral Dean Moufang, the Cardinals 
Rampolla, Galimberti and Casati, the Pope himself who was 
the leader of a peculiar "scorching ray," finally numerous 
monks and nuns; on one occasion 240 Benedictine Monks un- 
der the leadership of a Father whose name sounded like Star- 
kiewicz, suddenly moved into my head to perish therein. In 
the case of other souls, religious interests were mixed with 
national motives; amongst these was a Viennese nerve spe- 
cialist whose name by coincidence was identical with that of 
the above-named Benedictine Father, a baptized Jew and 
Slavophile, who wanted to make Germany Slavic through me 
and at the same time wanted to institute there the rule of 
Judaism; like Professor Flechsig for Germany, England and 
America (that is mainly Germanic States), he appeared to be 
in his capacity as nerve specialist a kind of administrator of 
God's interests in another of God's provinces (the Slavic 
parts of Austria); because of this a battle arose for a time be- 
tween him and Professor Flechsig through jealousy as to 
who was to predominate. Another group consisted mainly of 
former members of the Students' Corps Saxonia in Leipzig, to 
which Professor Flechsig belonged as drinking member^ and 
who were, I believed, helped by him to Blessedness; among 
them were the lawyer Dr. G. S. in Dresden, the Doctor of




MEMOIRS
Medicine S. in Leipzig, Senior District Judge G. and many 
younger members of the Corps who were later called "those 
suspended under Cassiopeia." There were also many members 
of the Students' Union who had gained such great ascendency 
for a time that they were able to occupy the planets Jupiter, 
Saturn and Uranus; the most prominent of them were the 
lawyer A. K., Vice-President of the Prussian Chamber of Dep- 
uties, whom by the way I never knew personally, the Uni- 
versity Dean Professor W., and the lawyer H. in Leipzig. They 
and the previously mentioned members of the Corps Saxonia 
treated the whole affair going on in my head merely as a con- 
tinuation of the old feud between members of the Corps and 
the Students' Union. There were also Dr. Wächter, who was 
to take up a position of leadership on Sirius, Dr. Hoffmann, 
who was to take up a similar position on the Pleiades and who 
therefore, having been dead a long time, appeared already to 
have reached a higher degree of Blessedness. Both knew me 
personally in their lifetime and presumably for that reason 
took a certain interest in me.
   Finally I wish to name some of my relatives (apart from my 
father and brother who have already been mentioned above, 
my mother, my wife and my father-in-law], the friend of my 
youth Ernest K., who died in 1864, and a Prince who appeared 
on my head as a "little man," in the sense to be explained 
later, and there in a manner of speaking went a-walking.
   All these souls spoke to me as "voices" more or less at 
the same time without one knowing of the presence of the 
others. Everyone who realizes that all this is not just the mor- 
bid offspring of my fantasy, will be able to appreciate the 
unholy turmoil they caused in my head. It is true the souls 
had at that time still their own thoughts and were therefore 
able to give information of the highest interest to me; they 
were also able to answer questions, whereas for a long time 
now the talk of the voices has consisted only of a terrible.



Continuation. Nerve-language . .
monotonous repetition qi ever-recurring phrases (learnt by 
rote). The reason for this I will give later. Besides those souls 
who were recognizable as specific individuals, there were at 
the same time other voices pretending to be God's omnipo- 
tence itself in higher and higher instances (compare footnote 
19); for these the individual souls appeared to act, so to speak, 
as outposts.
   The second point to be discussed in this chapter is the ten- 
dency, innate in the Order of the World, to unman a human 
being who has entered into permanent contact with rays. This 
is connected on the one hand with the nature of God's nerves, 
through which Blessedness (the enjoyment of which is dis- 
cussed on pages 28 and 29) is felt, if not exclusively as, at least 
accompanied by, a greatly increased feeling of voluptuousness,- 
on the other hand it is connected with the basic plan on which 
the Order of the World seems to rest, that in the case of world 
catastrophes which necessitate the destruction of mankind 
on any star, whether intentionally or otherwise, the human 
race can be renewed. When on some star moral decay ("volup- 
tuous excesses") or perhaps nervousness has seized the whole 
of mankind to such an extent that the forecourts of heaven 
(compare footnote 11) could not be expected to be adequately 
replenished by their excessively blackened nerves, or there 
was reason to fear a dangerous increase of attraction on God's 
nerves, then the destruction of the human race on that star 
could occur either spontaneously (through annihilating epi- 
demics, etc.) or, being decided on by God, be put into effect by 
means of earthquakes, deluges, etc. Perhaps God was also able 
to withdraw partially or totally the warmth of the sun from a 
star doomed to perish (or the respective fixed star which served 
to warm it); this would throw new light on the problem of the 
Ice Age which, as far as I know, has not yet been solved by sci- 
ence. The objection that at the time of the Ice Age on earth, 
humanity existed only in its (diluvial) beginnings, could hardly
L



MEMOIRS
be regarded as conclusive. Who can say whether at that time a 
highly developed race of man did not exist on some other 
planet, perhaps Venus, upon whose destruction God was bent 
and which could not be carried out without at the same time 
causing considerable cooling of the earth which had remained 
behind in its development?^' In all these matters human beings 
must strive to see beyond their ingrained petty geocentric 
ideas and regard the matter from the lofty viewpoint of eter- 
nity. It is possible that in this sense Cuvier's theory of periodi- 
cally recurring world catastrophes contains some truth. In 
such an event, in order to maintain the species, one single hu- 
man being was spared—perhaps the relatively most moral— 
called by the voices that talk to me the "Eternal few." This 
appellation has therefore a somewhat different sense from that 
underlying the legend of the same name of the Jew Ahasver; 
one is however automatically reminded of the legends of Noah, 
Deucalion and Pyrrha, etc. Perhaps the legend of the founding 
of Rome belongs here also, according to which Rhea Sylvia 
conceived the later Kings Romulus and Remus directly of 
Mars the God of War, and not of an earthly father. The Eternal 
Jew (in the sense described) had to be unmanned (transformed 
into a woman) to be able to bear children. This process of un- 
manning consisted in the (external) male genitals (scrotum and 
penis) being retracted into the body and the internal sexual or- 
gans being at the same time transformed into the correspond- 
ing female sexual organs, a process which might have been 
completed in a sleep lasting hundreds of years, because the 
skeleton (pelvis, etc.) had also to be changed. A regression oc- 
curred therefore, or a reversal of that developmental process



Continuation. Nerve-language . .
which occurs in the human embryo in the fourth or fifth month 
of pregnancy, according to whether nature intends the future 
child to be of male or female sex. It is well known that in 
the first months of pregnancy the rudiments of both sexes 
are laid down and the characteristics of the sex which is not 
developed remain as rudimentary organs at a lower stage of 
development, like the nipples of the male. The rays of the 
lower God (Ariman) have the power of producing the miracle 
of unmanning; the rays of the upper God (Ormuzd) have the 
power of restoring manliness when necessary. I have myself 
twice experienced (for a short time) the miracle of unmanning 
on my own body, as already mentioned in footnote 1; that 
the miracle did not reach full development and that it was 
even reversed again, was due only to the fact that, apart from 
the pure rays of God, other rays were present led by "tested" 
(impure) souls (compare page 35 above), Flechsig's rays and 
others, which prevented the completion of the process of 
transformation in its purity and in accordance with the Order 
of the World. The Eternal Jew was maintained and provided 
with the necessary means of life by the "fleeting-improvised- 
men" (compare footnote 1 above); that is to say souls were 
for this purpose transitorily put into human shape by miracles, 
probably not only for the lifetime of the Eternal Jew him- 
self but for many generations, until his offspring were suffi- 
ciently numerous to be able to maintain themselves. This 
seems to be the main purpose of the institution of "fleeting- 
improvised-men" in the Order of the World. I cannot say 
whether it also perhaps served the purpose of providing souls 
in the process of purification with the opportunity of doing 
some job of work—necessary for their purification—by putting 
them into human form (compare page 25 above); however 
that may be, the purpose of the fleeting-improvised-men was 
not only a mere play-with-miracles, into which it degenerated 
towards me in the latter part of my stay in Flechsig s Asylum,




MEMOIRS
during my time in Pierson's Asylum and in the early days of 
my stay in this Asylum.™
   It is my opinion that Professor Flechsig must have had 
some idea of this tendency, innate in the Order of the World, 
whereby in certain conditions the unmanning of a human be- 
ing is provided for; perhaps he thought of this himself or these 
ideas were inspired in him by divine rays, which I think is 
more likely. A fundamental misunderstanding obtained how- 
ever, which has since run like a red thread through my entire 
life. It is based upon the fact that, within the Order of the 
World, God did not really understand the living human being 
and had no need to understand him, because, according to the 
Order of the World, He dealt only with corpses. The other rele- 
vant issue is the dependence on Professor Flechsig, or on his 
soul, in which God found Himself through His inability to dis- 
solve again the nerve-contact which Professor Flechsig had 
managed to establish and then to abuse by holding fast to it. 
Thus began the policy of vacillation in which attempts to cure 
my nervous illness^' alternated with efforts to annihilate me as 
a human being who, because of his ever-increasing nervous- 
ness, had become a danger to God Himself. From this devel- 
oped a policy of half measures ("half-heartedness" is the 
expression which I heard repeatedly), entirely in keeping with



Continuation. Nerve-language . .
the souls' character, who were used to uninterrupted enjoy- 
ment, and were therefore not or only little capable of tempo- 
rary sacrifice or temporary denial of pleasure in order to 
procure permanent advantages in the future, a quality which is 
peculiar to human beings. The contact established with my 
nerves became more indissoluble, the more miracles were 
directed against me. In the meantime Professor Flechsig had 
found a way of raising himself up to heaven, either with the 
whole or part of his soul, and so making himself a leader of 
rays, without prior death and without undergoing the process 
of purification. In this way a plot was laid against me (perhaps 
March or April 1894), the purpose of which was to hand me 
over to another human being after my nervous illness had been 
recognized as, or assumed to be, incurable, in such a way that 
my soul was handed to him, but my body—transformed into a 
female body and, misconstruing the above-described funda- 
mental tendency of the Order of the World—was then left to 
that human being for sexual misuse and simply "forsaken," in 
other words left to rot. One does not seem to have been quite 
clear as to what was to happen to such a "forsaken" human be- 
ing, nor whether this actually meant his death. I have not the 
slightest doubt that this plot really existed, with the proviso 
always that I do not dare maintain that Professor Flechsig took 
part in it in his capacity as a human being. Naturally such 
matters were not mentioned by Professor Flechsig when he 
faced me as a human being. But the purpose was clearly ex- 
pressed in the nerve-language, as it was called at the beginning 
of this chapter, that is in the nerve-contact which he main- 
tained at the same time as a soul. The way I was treated exter- 
nally seemed to agree with the intention announced in the 
nerve-language; for weeks I was kept in bed and my clothes 
were removed to make me—as I believed—more amenable 
to voluptuous sensations, which could be stimulated in me by 
the female nerves which had already started to enter my body,-
63



MEMOIRS
medicines, which I am convinced served the same purpose, 
were also used;'' these I therefore refused, or spat out again 
when an attendant poured them forcibly into my mouth. 
Having, as I thought, definitely come to realize this abom- 
inable intention, one may imagine how my whole sense of 
manliness and manly honor, my entire moral being, rose up 
against it, all the more so as I was stirred at that time by the 
first revelations about divine affairs which I had received 
through contact with other souls, and was completely filled by 
holy ideas about God and the Order of the World. Completely 
cut off from the outside world, without any contact with my 
family, left in the hands of rough attendants with whom, the 
inner voices said, it was my duty to fight now and then to 
prove my manly courage, I could think of nothing else but that 
any manner of death, however frightful, was preferable to so 
degrading an end. I therefore decided to end my life by starving 
to death and refused all food; the inner voices always reiterated 
that it was my duty to die of hunger and in this way to sacri- 
fice myself for God, and that therefore any partaking of meals 
which my body demanded was a weakness unworthy of me. 
This resulted in the so-called "feeding system" being started: 
attendants, mostly the same ones—apart from R. already men- 
tioned, a certain H. and a third whose name I do not know— 
forced food into my mouth, at times with the utmost brutality. 
Again and again one of them held my hands while the other 
knelt on me as I lay in bed in order to empty food or pour beer 
into my mouth.
   Every bath I took was connected with ideas of drowning. In 
the nerve-language one spoke of "purifying baths" and "holy 
baths"; the purpose of the latter was to give me the oppor- 
tunity of drowning myself. I nearly always entered the bath
64



Continuation. Nerve-language . . .
inwardly afraid that its purpose was to end my life. The 
inner voices (particularly the souls belonging to the above- 
mentioned Students' Corps Saxonia, the so-called Brothers of 
Cassiopeia) spoke to me continuously in this sense and derided 
my lack of manly courage to carry it out; this made me repeat- 
edly attempt to put my head under the water; sometimes the 
attendants would then raise my feet above the water so seem- 
ingly facilitating my suicidal intent; they even ducked my 
head repeatedly, and then while making all sorts of rude jokes 
forced me to come to the surface again, and finally leave the 
bath." In the contact kept up with Professor Flechsig's nerves I 
constantly demanded cyanide or strychnine from him in order 
to poison myself (a drop of venom-juice, as it was called in the 
basic language); Professor Flechsig—as a soul in nerve-contact 
with me—did not refuse this demand, but always half prom- 
ised it, making its handing over, however, in a hypocritical 
manner conditional on certain guarantees during long hours of 
conversation by nerve-contact, when it was queried whether I 
would really drink the poison if it were given me, etc. When 
Professor Flechsig, on his medical rounds as a human being, 
subsequently came to me, he of course denied all knowledge of 
these matters. Being buried alive was also repeatedly men- 
tioned as a way of ending my life. From the human point of 
view, which on the whole still dominated me at that time, it 
was in consequence very natural for me to see my real enemy 
only in Professor Flechsig or his soul (later in von W.'s soul 
also, about which more will be said below) and to regard as my 
natural ally God's omnipotence, which I imagined only Pro- 
fessor Flechsig endangered; I therefore thought I had to support 
it by all possible means, even to the point of self-sacrifice. It



MEMOIRS
occurred to me only much later, in fact only while writing this 
essay did it become quite clear to me, that God Himself must 
have known of the plan, if indeed He was not the instigator, to 
commit soul murder on me, and to hand over my body in the 
manner of a female harlot. But I must at once repeat what I ex- 
pressed at the end of Chapter 2, so as not to confuse other peo- 
ple's religious ideas and feelings: however abominable the 
whole plan was bound to appear to me, subjectively speaking, I 
must nevertheless acknowledge that it originated in that in- 
stinct of self-preservation, as natural in God as in every other 
living being—an instinct which as mentioned in another con- 
text (compare page 59 above) forced God in special circum- 
stances to contemplate the destruction not only of individual 
human beings, but perhaps of whole stars with all the created 
beings upon them. In the nineteenth chapter of the first book 
of Moses we are told that Sodom and Gomorrah were de- 
stroyed by a rain of brimstone and fire, although of their inhab- 
itants there were some, even though very few, "righteous" 
men. Besides, in the whole domain of the created world, no 
one considers it immoral when—as long as it does not con- 
travene the Order of the World—the stronger conquers the 
weaker, a people of higher culture expel from their abode one 
of a lower culture, the cat eats the mouse, the spider kills the 
fly, etc. In any case, the whole idea of morality can arise only 
within the Order of the World, that is to say within the natural 
bond which holds God and mankind together,- wherever the 
Order of the World is broken, power alone counts, and the 
right of the stronger is decisive. In my case, moral obliquity lay 
in God placing Himself outside the Order of the World by 
which He Himself must be guided; although not exactly 
forced. He was nevertheless induced to do this by a temptation 
very difficult for souls to resist, which was brought about by 
the presence of Professor Flechsigs impure ( tested ) soul in 
heaven. Further, by means of the high degree of human intelli-
66



Continuation. Nerve-language . . .
gence which it still retained, Flechsig's soul gained certain 
technical advantages (of which more will be said below) over 
those of God's nerves with which it first came in contact; the 
latter had not, as souls, the capacity for self-denying sacrifice 
necessary to procure me the amount of sleep needed for my 
cure, so rendering Flechsig's soul harmless. I am inclined to 
regard the whole development as a matter of fate, in which 
neither on God's nor on my part can there be a question of 
moral infringement. On the contrary, the Order of the World 
reveals its very grandeur and magnificence by denying even 
God Himself in so irregular a case as mine the means of 
achieving a purpose contrary to the Order of the World. All 
attempts at committing soul murder, at unmanning me for 
purposes contiaiy to the Order of the World^* (that is to sa 
for the sexual satisfaction of a human being) and later at de- 
struction of my reason, have failed. From this apparently so 
unequal battle between one weak human being and God 
Himself, I emerge, albeit not without bitter sufferings and dep- 
rivations, victorious, because the Order of the World is on my 
side.'* My external circumstances and my bodily condition 
have continued to improve from year to year. And so I live 
in the confident faith that the whole confusion was only an 
episode which will finally lead one way or another to the




MEMOIRS
restoration of conditions in consonance with the Order of the 
World. Perhaps the personal misfortunes I had to suffer and the 
loss of the states of Blessedness may even be compensated for, 
in that mankind will gain all at once, through my case, the 
knowledge of religious truth in much greater measure than 
possibly could have been achieved in hundreds and thousands 
of years by means of scientific research with the aid of all pos- 
sible intellectual acuity. It need hardly be said what incalcula- 
ble gain it would be for mankind if, through my personal fate, 
particularly as it will be shaped in the future, the foundations 
of mere materialism and of hazy pantheism would once and for 
all be demolished.



Personal experiences
continued. Visions.
"Seer of spirits"

THE PERIOD I have been trying to describe in the previ- 
ous chapter—from about the middle of March to the end of 
May 1894—assuming always that it was really a matter of a 
few earthly months only and not of centuries—was, I can truly 
say, the most gruesome time of my life. And yet it was also the 
holy time of my life, when my soul was immensely inspired by 
supernatural things, which came over me in ever-increasing 
number amidst the rough treatment which I suffered from out- 
side,- when I was filled with the most sublime ideas about God 
and the Order of the World. For all that, I have from my youth 
been anything but inclined towards religious fanaticism. Who- 
ever knew me intimately in my earlier life will bear witness 
that I had been a person of calm nature, without passion, clear- 
thinking and sober, whose individual gift lay much more in 
the direction of cool intellectual criticism than in the creative 
activity of an unbounded imagination. I was by no means what 
one might call a poet, although I have occasionally attempted a 
few verses on family occasions. Nor was I (in my youth) a truly



MEMOIRS
believing person in the sense of our positive religion. But nei- 
ther have I been at any time contemptuous of religion; rather I 
avoided talking much about religious matters and I had the 
feeling that people who had luckily retained in their later years 
a pious child's belief, should not be disturbed in their happi- 
ness. But for my own part I had occupied myself too much 
with the natural sciences, particularly with works based on 
the so-called modern doctrine of evolution, not to have begun 
to doubt, to say the least, the literal truth of all Christian reli- 
gious teachings. My general impression has always been that 
materialism cannot be the last word in religious matters, but I 
could not get myself either to believe firmly in the existence of 
a personal God or to retain such a belief."
   I am well aware of the difficulties in trying to present fur- 
ther details in this chapter about the period which above I 
called my holy time. The difficulties are in part external and in 
part of an inner nature. In the first place in such an attempt I 
have to rely totally on my memory, because at the time in 
question it was impossible to make notes; I had no writing ma- 
terial at my disposal, nor could I feel inclined to make written 
notes, because at that time—whether rightly or wrongly must 
for the present remain undecided—I believed the whole of



Personal experiences continued. Visions . . .
mankind to have perished^ so that there was no purpose in 
writing notes. Furthermore the impressions which rushed in 
upon me were such a wonderful mixture of natural events and 
happenings of a supernatural nature^ that it is extremely diffi- 
cult to distinguish mere dream visions from experiences in a 
waking state, that is to say to be certain how far all that I 
thought I had experienced was in fact historical reality. It is 
unavoidable therefore that my recollections of that time must 
in some measure bear the stamp of confusion.^^
   In order to give a picture first of all of the external condi- 
tions of my stay in the Nerve Clinic of the University, I



MEMOIRS
append a ground plan of it and a sketch of the grounds in 
which it stands, with such details as are necessary for my 
purposes.
WINDMILL WAY

Vitbofitic
Dkcctot

Cardcu uf ih
Gatdat of the
MakWKg
Female Wing
Moil) Building
 
   During the time from shortly before Christmas 1893 until 
perhaps the end of February 1894 (that is to say mainly the 
time during which I was regularly visited by my wife) I inhab- 
ited rooms, a, h, and c on the ground floor of the female wing,




Personal experiences continued. Visions . . .
which were probably given to me mainly because it was more 
quiet there. Before and after, I inhabited different rooms on 
the first floor of the male wing, each time a living-room and 
a bedroom. The little room d served this purpose for some 
time (in November 1893) because most of the other rooms of 
the Asylum lay on the south side of the corridor facing the 
Bavarian Station, where the whistling of the shunting trains 
was very disturbing, particularly at night. The padded cell to 
which I was removed after the fight in the billiard room de- 
scribed earlier, lay further to the left in the male wing. Towards 
the latter part of my stay in the Asylum I mainly used the 
bedroom i and the living-room e-, the former was, in the man 
ner of a padded room, provided with double doors, the inner 
one of which had a small peep-hole through which the inmate 
could be observed from outside; above the door there was an



MEMOIRS
opening provided with a pane of glass through which the light 
of a gas flame could enter. Some of my memories do not tally 
with any of the familiar rooms in Flechsig's Asylum; this in 
connection with other circumstances made me wonder 
whether in fact I spent the whole time that is dealt with here 
in Flechsig's Asylum, or whether I was somewhere else for a 
time. Professor Flechsig was assisted in the medical treatment 
by two assistant doctors, Dr. Täuscher and Dr. Quentin. 
During the time which I am discussing, there was a period 
when I did not see any of the doctors, only the attendants be- 
ing around—always the ones named above. The Asylum itself 
gave me at that time the impression of being completely de- 
serted; nor did I see anything of other patients when I entered 
the corridor outside my room. Some time later Professor 
Flechsig reappeared but as mentioned earlier, in a form which 
gave me at least the impression of his having changed consid- 
erably. As far as I can remember I either did not see the assis- 
tant physicians at all or only very occasionally during the 
latter part of my stay in the Asylum.
   I mentioned in the previous chapter that in consequence of 
my ever-increasing nervousness and the resulting increasing 
power of attraction, an ever-growing number of departed souls 
felt attracted to me—primarily those who may have retained 
some special interest in me because of personal contacts with 
me during their life—and then dissolved on my head or in my 
body. This process frequently ended with the souls concerned 
finally leading a short existence on my head in the form of "lit- 
tle men"—tiny figures in human form, perhaps only a few mil- 
limeters in height—before finally vanishing (compare footnote 
28). I suppose that these souls, when they first approached me, 
still possessed a fairly large number of nerves and in virtue of 
them still retained a fairly strong awareness of their identity. 
Each time they approached me they lost part of their nerves in 
favor of my body through the power of attraction; finally they
74



Personal experiences continued. Visions . . .
consisted only of one single nerve, which for some mysterious 
reason not further explicable, assumed the form of a "little man" 
in the above sense. This was the final form of existence of these 
souls before they vanished completely. On these occasions I 
was frequently told the names of the stars or groups of stars 
from which they had emanated or "from which they were sus- 
pended"; in part these names tallied with the usual astronomi- 
cal nomenclature, in part they did not. Especially frequent 
were the names Cassiopeia, Wega, Capella, also a star "Gemma" 
(I do not know if this conforms to an astronomical name); fur- 
ther the Crucians (perhaps the Southern Cross?), the "Firm- 
ament" and many others. On some nights the souls finally 
dripped down on to my head, in a manner of speaking, in their 
hundreds if not thousands, as "little men." I always warned 
them against approaching me, since I had become aware of the 
immensely increased power of attraction of my nerves from 
what had happened earlier, but the souls could not at first be- 
lieve that I had such a dangerous power of attraction. Other 
rays which conducted themselves in the manner described above 
as if they were God's omnipotence itself, carried names such 
as "the Lord of Hosts," "the Good Shepherd," "the Almighty," 
etc., etc. Connected with these phenomena, very early on there 
predominated in recurrent nightly visions the notion of an ap- 
proaching end of the world, as a consequence of the indissolu- 
ble connection between God and myself. Bad news came in 
from all sides that even this or that star or this or that group of 
stars had to be "given up"; at one time it was said that even 
Venus had been "flooded," at another that the whole solar sys- 
tem would now have to be "disconnected," that the Cassiopeia 
(the whole group of stars) had had to be drawn together into a 
single sun, that perhaps only the Pleiades could still be saved, 
etc., etc. While I had these visions at night, in day-time I thought 
I could notice the sun following my movements; when I 
moved to and fro in the single-windowed room I inhabited at
75



MEMOIRS
the time, I saw the sunlight now on the right, now on the left 
wall (as seen from the door) depending on my movements. It is 
difficult for me to believe that this observation was a halluci- 
nation because it was made, as mentioned, in day-time, partic- 
ularly as I remember drawing the assistant physician Täuscher's 
attention on one of his visits to this observation, which natu- 
rally filled me with horror. When later I regularly visited the 
garden again I saw—if my memory does not wholly deceive 
me—two suns in the sky at the same time, one of which was 
our earthly sun, the other was said to be the Cassiopeia group 
of stars drawn together into a single sun.
   From the sum total of my recollections, the impression 
gained hold of me that the period in question, which, accord- 
ing to human calculation, stretched over only three to four 
months, had covered an immensely long period; it was as if 
single nights had the duration of centuries, so that within 
that time the most profound alterations in the whole of 
mankind, in the earth itself and the whole solar system could 
very well have taken place. It was repeatedly mentioned in 
visions that the work of the past fourteen thousand years 
had been lost—this figure presumably indicated the duration 
the earth had been populated with human beings—and that 
approximately only another two hundred years were allotted 
to the earth—if I am not mistaken the figure 212 was men- 
tioned. During the latter part of my stay in Flechsig's Asylum 
I thought this period had already expired^' and therefore



Personal experiences continued. Visions . . .
thought I was the last real human being left, and that the 
few human shapes whom I saw apart from myself—Professor 
Flechsig, some attendants, occasional more or less strange- 
looking patients—were only "fleeting-improvised-men" cre- 
ated by miracle. I pondered over such possibilities as that 
the whole of Flechsig's Asylum or perhaps the city of Leipzig 
with it had been "dug out" and removed to some other celes- 
tial body, all of them possibilities which questions asked 
by the voices who talked to me seemed to hint at, as for 
instance whether Leipzig was still standing, etc. I regarded 
the starry sky largely, if not wholly, extinguished. I was not 
afforded the chance of correcting such notions. My bed- 
room window was closed up with a heavy wooden shutter 
at night so that the sight of the night sky was denied me. 
In day-time I saw over and beyond the walls of the 
Asylum only a few of the buildings immediately bordering 
on it. In the direction of the Bavarian Station I saw beyond 
the walls of the Asylum only a narrow strip of land, which 
looked quite strange to me and very different from the charac- 
ter of this district which I knew so well; at times one spoke 
of "a holy landscape." The whistle of trains, which I could 
hardly have missed, I did not hear at all for some considerable 
time. Only the fact that the gaslights continued burning made 
me doubt whether Flechsig's Asylum was in fact completely 
isolated, or it forced me to recognize some connection with 
the city of Leipzig, if I was not to assume that the Asylum had 
had its own special gasometer built. Further, I retain some 
recollections which I can only describe in a general way, to 
the effect that I felt as if I myself existed for some time 
also in a second, mentally inferior form. I must leave unde- 
cided whether something of this nature can occur through 
miracles, and whether it would have been possible for me 
to be placed again with part of my nerves into a second 
body. I can but repeat that I have recollections which seem




MEMOIRS
to point to such a possibility. In this second inferior 
shape, of which I myself retain the conscious awareness of 
having had lesser intellectual powers, I was told that an- 
other Daniel Paul Schreber had existed before me who had 
been much better endowed intellectually than myself. As 
in my family pedigree, which I know extremely well, there 
had been no Daniel Paul Schreber before me, I think I am 
justified in taking this other Daniel Paul Schreber as re- 
ferring to myself while in full possession of my nerves. In 
the second inferior shape I must then, if I may use the 
expression, have quietly departed one day; I can recollect 
that in a room which does not tally with any one of the 
rooms known to me in Flechsig's Asylum, I was lying in 
bed with the distinct feeling that my soul was slowly 
expiring, a state by the way which, apart from sad memories 
of my wife who was much in my mind during that time, 
had altogether the character of a painless and peaceful 
passing away. On the other hand there was a time when 
souls in nerve-contact with me talked of a plurality of heads 
(that is several individuals in one and the same skull) 
which they encountered in me and from which they shrank 
in alarm crying "For heaven's sake—that is a human being 
with several heads." I am fully aware how fantastic all this 
must sound to other people,- and I therefore do not go so 
far as to assert that all I have recounted was objective reality; 
I only relate the impressions retained as recollections in my 
memory.
   As I said before, the innumerable visions I had in connec- 
tion with the idea that the world had perished were partly of 
a gruesome nature, partly of an indescribable sublimity. I 
will recall only a few. In one of them it was as though I were 
sitting in a railway carriage or in a lift driving into the depths 
of the earth and I recapitulated, as it were, the whole history of




Personal experiences continued. Visions . . .
mankind or of the earth in reverse order; in the upper regions 
there were still forests of leafy trees; in the nether regions 
it became progressively darker and blacker. When temporarily 
I left the vehicle, I walked as though across a large cemetery 
where, coming upon the place where Leipzig's inhabitants 
lay buried, I crossed my own wife's grave. Sitting again in the 
vehicle I advanced only to a point 3; point 1, which was to 
mark the earliest beginning of mankind, I dared not enter. On 
the return drive the shaft collapsed behind me, continually 
endangering a "sun deity" who was in it too. In this connec- 
tion it was said that there had been two shafts (perhaps corre- 
sponding to the dualism of the realms of God?); when news 
came that the second shaft had also collapsed, it was thought 
that everything was lost. Another time I traversed the earth 
from Lake Ladoga to Brazil and, together with an attendant, 
I built there in a castle-like building a wall in protection of 
God's realms against an advancing yellow flood tide: I related 
this to the peril of a syphilitic epidemic. At another time I 
felt as if I myself were raised up to Blessedness, it was as 
though from the heights of heaven the whole earth were 
resting under a blue vault below me, a picture of sublime 
splendor and beauty; I heard some expression like "God-be- 
together-view" to describe this picture. In the case of other 
events I am doubtful whether they were only visions or at 
least in part real experiences. I remember that during the night 
I frequently sat on the floor of my bedroom, clad only in a 
shirt (all articles of clothing had of course been taken from 
me) having left the bed following some inner impulse. My 
hands, which I set firmly on the floor behind my back, were 
perceptibly lifted up at times by bearlike shapes (black bears); 
other "black bears," both greater and smaller, I saw sitting 
around me with glowing eyes. My bedclothes formed them- 
selves into so-called "white bears." Through the peep-hole of
79



MEMOIRS
my bedroom door I saw in a similar manner as recounted about 
our reigning King" in footnote 28, yellow men, under middle- 
size, appear now and then in front of the door of my bedroom, 
whom I had to be prepared to fight in some way. At times cats 
with glowing eyes appeared on the trees of the Asylum's gar- 
den while I was still awake, that is to say in the late evening 
hours. Further, I recollect being for a time somewhere by the 
sea in a castle which had to be abandoned because of threaten- 
ing floods; from which, after a long, long time I returned to 
Flechsig's Asylum, where I found myself all at once in the 
same circumstances as before. In front of my bedroom win- 
dows I saw in the early morning, when the shutters were 
opened, a dense forest, a few meters only removed from the 
window and consisting as far as I can remember mostly of 
birches and firs. The voices called it a "holy forest." It had not 
the slightest resemblance to the garden of the University 
Nerve Clinic which is a new plantation started only in 1882, 
consisting mostly of rows of single trees alongside the paths. 
It goes without saying that such a forest, if it really ex- 
isted, could not possibly ha\re sprung up in three or four 
months. My head was frequently surrounded by a shimmer of 
light owing to the massive concentration of rays, like the halo 
of Christ is pictured, but incomparably richer and brighter: the 
so-called "crown of rays." The reflection of this crown of rays 
was so strong that one day when Professor Flechsig appeared at 
my bed with his assistant Dr. Quentin, the latter disappeared 
from my seeing eyes; the same happened another time with



Personal experiences continued. Visions . . .
the attendant H. For a long time it was said that I was to 
remain under the protection of Cassiopeia, while the sun was 
assigned to a different destination, and was probably to be pre- 
served for her own planetary system and thus also for our 
earth. The power of attraction of my nerves was however so 
strong that this plan could not be carried out: the sun had to 
remain where I was or I myself had to be brought back again.
   It will be understandable that with such impressions, which 
I may attempt to interpret in a later chapter, I lived for years in 
doubt as to whether I was really still on earth or whether on 
some other celestial body. Even in the year 1895* I still consid- 
ered the possibility of my being on Phobos, a satellite of the 
planet Mars which had once been mentioned by the voices in 
some other context, and wondered whether the moon, which I 
sometimes saw in the sky, was not the main planet Mars.
   In the soul-language, during the time dealt with in this 
chapter, I was called "the seer of spirits,"" that is, a man who 
sees, and is in communication with, spirits or departed souls. 
In particular, Flechsig's soul used to refer to me as "the great- 
est seer of spirits of all centuries"; to which I, from a wider 
point of view, occasionally retorted, that one ought at least to 
speak of the greatest seer of spirits of all millennia. In fact since 
the dawn of the world there can hardly have been a case like 
mine, in which a human being entered into continual contact, 
that is to say no longer subject to interruption, not only with 
individual departed souls but with the totality of all souls and 
with God's omnipotence itself. It is true that at first one still 
attempted to interrupt it; one then still differentiated "holy 
times," that is times when nerve-contact or communication



MEMOIRS
with rays or talking of voices—after all only different expres- 
sions for one and the same phenomenon—were to occur and 
"unholy times" when it was intended to give up the communi- 
cation with rays. Soon, however, the enormous attraction of 
my nerves would not allow of any such pauses or interrup- 
tions; from then on there were only "holy times." Seers of spir- 
its of an inferior kind may well have existed in greater or lesser 
numbers before my own case. To avoid going back as far as bib- 
lical events, I consider it very likely that in the cases of the 
Maid of Orleans, of the Crusaders in search of the Holy Lance 
at Antioch, or of the Emperor Constantine's well-known vi- 
sion in hoc signo vinces which was decisive for the victory of 
Christianity: that in all these cases a transitory communica- 
tion with rays was established, or there was transitory divine 
inspiration. The same may possibly also be assumed in some 
cases of stigmatization of virgins; the legends and poetry of all 
peoples literally swarm with the activities of ghosts, elves, 
goblins, etc., and it seems to me nonsensical to assume that 
in all of them one is dealing simply with deliberate inventions 
of human imagination without any foundation in real fact. 
I noticed therefore with interest that according to Kraepelin's 
TEXTBOOK OF PSYCHIATRY (5th Edition, Leipzig, 1896, 
p. 95 ff. and particularly p. IIO ff.) which had been lent to me 
(while I was occupied with this manuscript), the phenomenon 
of being in some supernatural communication with voices had 
frequently been observed before in human beings whose nerves 
were in a state of morbid excitation."^ I do not dispute that in
42.	In this connection Kraepelin's remark on page 110 that those cases in which 
"the voices heard" have a supernatural character "are not infrequently accompa- 
nied by visual hallucinations" is very valuable for my own ideas. I think it proba- 
ble that in a considerable number of these cases it was a matter of real visions of 
the kind which I also have experienced, that is dream-images produced by rays, 
and which for that reason are very much more distinct than what is seen in ordi- 
nary dreams (compare Kraepelin, p. 107). On the other hand the total content of
- n
82



Personal experiences continued. Visions . . .
many of these cases one may only be dealing with mere hallu- 
cinations, as which they are treated throughout the mentioned 
textbook. In my opinion science would go very wrong to desig- 
nate as "hallucinations" all such phenomena that lack objec- 
tive reality, and to throw them into the lumber room of things 
that do not exist; this may possibly be justified in those hallu- 
cinations quoted by Kraepelin on page 108 ff., which are not 
connected with supernatural matters. I think it quite possible 
that some such cases were instances of genuine seers of spirits 
of an inferior grade in the earlier developed sense. This is not 
to deny the simultaneous existence of a morbid state of nerv- 
ous hyper-excitability, insofar as only the increased power of 
attraction of nerves caused by it enabled and facilitated com- 
munication with supernatural powers. It seems psychologi- 
cally impossible that I suffer only from hallucinations. After 
all, the hallucination of being in communication with God or 
departed souls can logically only develop in people who bring 
with them into their morbidly excited nervous state an already 
secure faith in God and the immortality of the soul. This, how- 
ever, was not so in my case, as mentioned at the beginning of 
this chapter. Even so-called spiritualist mediums may be con- 
sidered genuine seers of spirits of the inferior kind in this



MEMOIRS
sense, although in many cases self-deception and fraud may 
also play a part. Therefore one ought to beware of unscientific 
generalization and rash condemnation in such matters. If psy- 
chiatry is not flatly to deny everything supernatural and thus 
tumble with both feet into the camp of naked materialism, it 
will have to recognize the possibility that occasionally the 
phenomena under discussion may be connected with real hap- 
penings, which simply cannot be brushed aside with the catch- 
word "hallucinations."
   After this digression I return to my real theme which I shall 
continue in the next chapter,-1 will touch on some other points 
concerning the supernatural which could not easily be dealt 
with in the above; I shall also discuss in particular the circum- 
stances of my external life during that time.
84



Personal experiences continued; 
peculiar manifestations of 
illness. Visions

FOR REASONS ALREADY mentioned I cannot give ex- 
act chronological data about the time between my wife's last 
visits (middle of February 1894) and the end of my stay in 
Flechsig's Asylum (middle of June 1894). I have only a few 
clues. I recollect that about the middle of March 1894 when 
communication with supernatural powers was well under 
way, a newspaper was put in front of me in which something 
like my own obituary notice could be read; I took this as a 
hint that I could no longer count on any possibility of a return 
to human society. I dare not decide whether what I saw ac- 
tually happened or whether it was a visual hallucination. I 
only retained the one impression, that if this and other oc- 
currences really were visions, there was method in them, i.e. 
that they were connected in a certain way which enabled me 
to realize what one had in store for me. This was the time 
when, as previously mentioned, I was kept in bed continu- 
ously day and night; whether for weeks and if so how many I 
cannot say. Round about the time of the Easter holidays—I




MEMOIRS
cannot say when Easter was in 1894—an important change 
must have taken place in Professor Flechsig's person. I heard 
that in these holidays he went on leave to the Palatinate or 
Alsace. In connection with this I had visions according to which 
Professor Flechsig had shot himself either in Weissenburg in 
Alsace or in the police prison in Leipzig; I also saw—in a dream 
vision—his funeral procession moving from his house towards 
the Thonberg (that is to say not really in the direction which 
one would expect according to the spatial relation between the 
University Nerve Clinic and St. John's Cemetery). In other vi- 
sions he repeatedly appeared to me accompanied by a police- 
man or in conversation with his wife, which I witnessed by 
way of nerve-contact and where Professor Flechsig called him- 
self "God Flechsig" to his wife, so that she was inclined to 
think he was mad. I am, however, almost certain now that 
these visions did not conform to real happenings in the way I 
believed I had seen them. But I think it is permissible to inter- 
pret them as revelations of divine opinion on what ought to 
have happened to Professor Flechsig. However that may be, 
it is an actual or subjectively certain event from the distinct- 
ness of my recollection—whether other people can or cannot 
believe me—that about that time I had Professor Flechsig's 
soul and most probably his whole soul temporarily in my body. 
It was a fairly bulky ball or bundle which I can perhaps best 
compare with a corresponding volume of wadding or cobweb, 
which had been thrown into my belly by way of miracle, pre- 
sumably to perish there. In view of its size it would in any case 
probably have been impossible to retain this soul in my belly, 
to digest it so to speak; indeed when it attempted to free itself 
I let it go voluntarily, being moved by a kind of sympathy, and 
so it escaped through my mouth into the open again. I have all 
the less reason to doubt the objective reality of this event, as 
in quite a number of other instances later I received souls or 
parts of souls in my mouth, of which I particularly remember




Personal experiences continued . . .
distinctly the foul taste and smell which such impure souls 
cause in the body of the person through whose mouth they 
have entered.
   These events were followed as far as I can remember by a 
period which the voices called the time of the first Divine 
Judgment. By coincidence I have retained a few data in my 
memory which must have been mentioned by somebody, ac- 
cording to which the first Divine Judgment embraced the 
period from the 2nd or 4th to the 19th of April 1894. The "first 
Divine Judgment" was then followed by a number of further 
Divine Judgments which, however, lagged behind the first in 
grandeur of impression. The "first Divine Judgment" was a 
series of continuous visions by day and by night, all based, if I 
may so express myself, on one common basic general idea. 
This was the idea that after a crisis dangerous for the existence 
of the realms of God which had arisen in the circles of the 
German people through the conflict between Professor Flechsig 
and myself, the German people, particularly Protestant Ger- 
many, could no longer be left with the leadership as God's cho- 
sen people, had perhaps even to to be excluded altogether 
when other "globes" ("inhabited planets?") were occupied, un- 
less a champion appeared for the German people to prove their 
continued worth. At one time I myself was to be that cham- 
pion, at another a person chosen by me, and because of the in- 
sistence of the voices that talked to me in nerve-contact I 
named a number of outstanding men whom I deemed fit for 
such a struggle. Connected with the mentioned basic idea of 
the first Divine Judgment, was the advance of Catholicism, 
Judaism, and Slavism mentioned in the last chapter. I had a 
number of visions relating to this also, amongst which I saw 
the female wing of the University Nerve Clinic turned into a 
Nunnery or a Catholic Chapel, Sisters of Mercy sitting in the 
rooms under the Asylum s roof, etc., etc. But then it was said 
that Catholicism would no longer do; after the death of the



MEMOIRS
present Pope and of an intervening Pope Honorius, a further 
conclave could not be held because Catholics had lost their 
faith, etc. At the time I took all these to be actual historical 
events and therefore thought that a development of possibly 
several hundred years already belonged to the past. Naturally I 
do not hold this opinion any longer. Having resumed some 
contact with the outside world—naturally after the elapse of 
several years—through newspapers and letters, and having no- 
ticed nothing in the state of buildings in the Asylum and its 
neighborhood, nor in the condition of my old books, music and 
other useful articles, which had in the meantime been re- 
turned to me, which would tally with the assumption of a 
large gap in time having occurred in the history of mankind, I 
can now no longer refuse to acknowledge that viewed merely 
from outside everything has remained as of old. But whether a 
very profound inner change has taken place nevertheless will 
be discussed later.
   Of considerable influence on my range of ideas at the time 
was also certain information referring to what I was to become 
in a future transmigration of souls. I was cast in several roles 
consecutively: a "Hyperborian woman," a "Jesuit Novice in Os- 
segg," a "Burgomaster of Klattau," "an Alsatian girl who had to 
defend her honor against a victorious French officer," finally "a 
Mongolian Prince." In all these predictions I thought I could dis- 
cern a certain connection with the overall picture furnished by 
the other visions. The fate of becoming a "Hyperborian woman" 
seemed a sign that the earth had lost so much heat that general 
glaciation had either occurred already or was imminent; apart 
from this there was talk that the sun had withdrawn as far as 
Jupiter. That I was destined to be a Jesuit Novice in Ossegg or a 
Burgomaster in Klattau or even an Alsatian girl in the situation 
specified above, I took as prophesies that Protestantism had 
either already succumbed to or was about to succumb to 
Catholicism, and the German people to their Roman and Slavic



Personal experiences continued . .
neighbors; the prospect of my becoming a "Mongolian Prince" 
appeared to me as a sign that all Aryan peoples had proved them- 
selves unsuitable to defend the realms of God, and that a last 
refuge would now have to be taken with non-Aryan peoples.
   A fateful turn in the history of the earth and of mankind 
seemed to be marked by the events of one single day distinctly 
preserved in my memory, on which there was talk of the 
"clocks of the world" running out and at the same time a con- 
tinuous rich stream of rays towards my body accompanied 
by light phenomena of great splendor. I cannot say what was 
meant by the expression "the running out of the clocks of the 
world"; it was said that the whole of mankind would return 
but for two, namely myself and the Jesuit Father S., mentioned 
earlier in Chapter 5. From then on the conditions commenced 
which have since been called hundreds and thousands of times 
"the cursed play-with-human-beings." I have reason to assume 
that since then, mankind and all its activities have only been 
artificially maintained by means of direct divine miracles, to 
an extent which the restrictions under which I live do not al- 
low me to survey fully."™ This is certainly the case in my own 
surroundings: I feel a blow on my head simultaneously with 
every word spoken around me, with every approaching foot- 
step, with every railway whistle, with every shot fired by a 
pleasure steamer, etc.; this causes a variable degree of pain— 
more when God has withdrawn to a greater distance and less 
when He is nearby. Almost invariably I can foretell accurately 
when there is going to be such a manifestation of life by a 
human being near me, called "interference" and felt by me 
as a blow; namely always when the sensation of voluptuous- 
ness present in my body has gained such a strong power of 
attraction over the divine rays, that in order to be able to with- 
draw again such an interference is necessary. I cannot say up



MEMOIRS
to what distance this incitement oí people, if I may use that 
expression, by divine miracles takes place. I will return to the 
whole matter in greater detail later.
   With regard to the changes in the starry sky, it is now my 
opinion that news of the loss of this or that star or stellar con- 
stellation (compare Chapter 6, page 75) did not refer to the 
stars themselves—after all I still see them in the sky as be- 
fore—but only to the states of Blessedness accumulated under 
these stars. However, these have certainly been totally depleted, 
that is to say the nerves concerned have, through the power of 
attraction of my nerves, been absorbed into my body; in it they 
have taken on the character of female nerves of voluptuous- 
ness and apart from this have given my body a more or less 
feminine stamp; they have in particular given my skin a soft- 
ness peculiar to the female sex. On the other hand I am quite 
certain that God^ who used to be an immense distance away, 
had been forced to draw nearer the earth, which thus became 
the direct and continual scene of divine miracles in a manner 
hitherto unknown. These miracles primarily concentrated on 
my person and surroundings. Later I will produce further proof 
of this statement over and above what has been said so far. 
Here I only want to remark that because the change thus 
wrought is contrary to the Order of the World it is connected 
with certain disadvantages even for God Himself, and may 
possibly be accompanied by other fateful consequences. Rays, 
after all, are accustomed to holy tranquility such as prevails 
on the highest mountain summits of the earth; therefore it 
must be disagreeable for them and in a way frightening to have 
suddenly to participate in all my auditory impressions, for in- 
stance the noise of railways."" Further, I have reason to assume 
that from this date (or perhaps three months later, about which



Personal experiences continued . . .
more below), the sending forth of the sun's rays was taken over 
directly by God, more especially by the lower God (Ariman); 
the voices that talk to me now (since July 1894) identify him 
with the sun. The upper God (Ormuzd) kept himself at a 
greater, perhaps even still at a colossal distance; I see his pic- 
ture as a small sun-like disc, so tiny as to be almost a mere 
point, appear at short intervals on the nerves inside my head. 
Perhaps apart from our own planetary system which is lighted 
and warmed by the sun (Ariman), a second has been success- 
fully maintained on which the continuity of creation is made 
possible by light and warmth emanating from the upper God 
(Ormuzd). But I consider it very doubtful at least, whether the 
population of all other celestial bodies belonging to other fixed 
stars on which organic life had developed, were not also 
doomed to perish."''
   The period during which I was continually kept in bed was 
followed, at the end of my stay in Flechsig's Asylum, by a time 
when I walked regularly in the garden. There I noticed a vari- 
ety of miraculous things. As already mentioned, I thought I 
saw two suns in the sky simultaneously. One day the whole 
garden was luxuriantly in bloom, a picture which did not fit 
my recollections of the first part of my illness when the garden 
of the University Nerve Clinic was quite bare; this phenome- 
non was called Flechsig's miracle. At another time, in the 
pavilion in the center of the garden, there were a number of 
French-speaking ladies, a most remarkable occurrence in the 
male section of a Public Asylum. The few patients besides



MEMOIRS
myself who sometimes appeared in the garden, all gave a more 
or less bizarre impression,- in one of them I once thought I rec- 
ognized a relative of mine, the husband of one of my nieces, 
now Professor Dr. F. in K. who looked shyly at me without say- 
ing a word. When I sat on a camp stool in the garden in a black 
coat with a black flap hat I felt like a marble guest who had re- 
turned from times long past into a strange world.
   In the meantime a most remarkable change occurred in my 
sleep. Whereas during the first months of the year 1894 I could 
only obtain sleep with the help of the strongest sleeping drugs 
(chloral hydrate) and not always then, some nights requiring 
additional injections of morphine, I took no sleeping drugs at 
all for several weeks at the end of my stay in Flechsig's 
Asylum. I slept—though in part restlessly and always with 
more or less exciting visions—without any artificial help: my 
sleep had become the sleep of rays.''Kays, as already observed 
in footnote 31, also have the capacity to calm nerves and bring 
sleep. This will be the more readily believed because even ordi- 
nary sun rays have a similar though much weaker effect. Every 
psychiatrist knows that in patients suffering from a nervous 
illness the nervous excitement increases considerably at night, 
but improves in day-time, particularly later in the morning af- 
ter the influence of a few hours of sunlight. This result is in- 
creased immensely if, as in my case, the body receives divine 
rays direct. Only relatively few rays are then needed to pro- 
duce sleep; but all these rays must be united, since derived



Personal experiences continued . . .
rays also exist (that is, led by impure or tested souls such as 
Flechsig's, etc.) apart from divine rays proper. When this hap- 
pens I fall asleep immediately. When I observed this phenome- 
non towards the end of my stay in Flechsig's Asylum, I was 
extremely surprised because sleep could only be procured for 
me with the greatest difficulties; I only became clear about the 
reason for it in the course of time.
   All kinds of extraordinary symptoms of illness appeared in 
my body in the course of time, apart from the repeatedly 
mentioned changes in my sex organ. In discussing them I must 
return again to the idea of the end of the world mentioned 
in preceding chapters, which, from the visions I received, I 
thought either imminent or already past. Varying with the sug- 
gestions I received I formed different opinions about the man- 
ner in which it might have come about. In the first place I 
always thought of a decrease in the warmth of the sun through 
her moving farther away, and consequently a more or less gen- 
eralized glaciation. In the second place I thought of an earth- 
quake or suchlike; in this connection I want to mention that I 
once received news that the great earthquake of Lisbon in the 
year 1755 had occurred in connection with a seer of spirits, 
similar to my own case. I further thought it possible that news 
had spread that in the modern world something in the nature 
of a wizard had suddenly appeared in the person of Professor 
Flechsig*' and that I myself, after all a person known in wider 
circles, had suddenly disappeared; this had spread terror and 
fear amongst the people, destroying the bases of religion and 
causing general nervousness and immorality. In its train devas- 
tating epidemics had broken upon mankind. This last idea was 
particularly supported by the fact that for some time there was 
talk of two illnesses, leprosy and plague, hardly yet known



MEMOIRS
in Europe, which were said to have spread among men and 
signs of which were visible on my own body. I do not want 
definitely to say the latter about leprosy; it could have been 
only a matter of small beginnings of this illness because I have 
no certain recollections of any single symptom of it. But I 
remember the names of the various forms in which leprosy 
was said to have occurred: Lepra onentalis, Lepra indica. 
Lepra hebraica and Lepra aegyptica. Being a layman in medi- 
cine I have never heard these terms before, nor do I know 
whether they correspond to the technical terms used for these 
types of the illness in medical science. I mention them here in 
order to disprove the assumption that it is all merely a matter 
of hallucinations dangled before me by my own nerves,- for 
how could I possibly have hit upon these expressions without 
any knowledge of my own of the different varieties of this dis- 
ease? That I must have at least had some germs of leprosy is 
shown by the fact that for a long time I had to recite certain 
strange-soimding incantations, such as "I am the first leper 
corpse and I lead a leper corpse'""—incantations which, as far 
as I could understand, were connected with the fact that lepers 
had to consider themselves doomed to certain death; and had 
to help inter one another so as to provide for themselves an 
at least tolerable death. On the other hand I had on my body at 
various times fairly definite signs of the manifestations of 
plague. There were different varieties of plague: the blue plague, 
the brown plague, the white plague, and the black plague. The 
white plague was the most disgusting; the brown and the black 
plague were connected with the evaporations of the body, 
which in the former spread a glue-like and in the latter a soot- 
like smell; in the case of the black plague this was at times so



Personal experiences continued . . .
Strong that it filled my whole room. I still noticed weak traces 
of the brown plague in the early part of my stay in this Asylum 
in the summer of 1894. The souls considered the plague a 
disease of nerves and hence a "holy disease"; I do not know 
whether it was in any way related to the occasional cases of 
bubonic plague of the present time. Nevertheless, even the 
plague did not develop to its full extent but remained confined 
to more or less marked indications. The reason for this was the 
fact that the manifestations of the disease were always subse- 
quently removed by pure rays. For one distinguished "searing"*' 
and "blessing" rays; the former were laden with the poison of 
corpses or some other putrid matter, and therefore carried 
some germ of disease into the body or brought about some 
other destructive effect in it. The blessing (pure) rays in turn 
healed this damage.
   Other things that happened on my body were still more 
closely connected with supernatural matters. It was men- 
tioned in earlier chapters that those rays (God's nerves) which 
were attracted, followed only reluctantly, because it meant 
losing their own existence and therefore went against their 
instinct of self-preservation. Therefore one continually tried 
to stop the attraction, in other words to break free again from 
my nerves. The only absolutely effective way of doing this 
would have been to cure my nervous illness by procuring 
prolific sleep. But apparently one could not decide to do this, 
or at least not systematically, because it would have needed 
a self-denying sacrifice on the part of the rays immediately 
concerned, for which they had neither the capacity nor the 
necessary will power.



MEMOIRS
   All Other conceivable methods were therefore tried in the 
course of time, but from the nature of the matter they all 
proved thoroughly unsuitable. Always the main idea behind 
them was to "forsake" me, that is to say abandon me; at the 
time I am now discussing it was thought that this could be 
achieved by unmanning me and allowing my body to be prosti- 
tuted like that of a female harlot, sometimes also by killing me 
and later by destroying my reason (making me demented).
   But with regard to the efforts to unman me it was soon 
found that the gradual filling of my body with nerves of 
voluptuousness (female nerves) had exactly the reverse effect, 
because the resulting so-called "soul-voluptuousness" in 
my body rather increased the power of attraction. Therefore 
"scorpions" were repeatedly put into my head, tiny crab- or 
spider-like structures which were to carry out some work of 
destruction in my head. These had the nature of souls and 
therefore were talking beings; they were distinguished accord- 
ing to their place of origin as "Aryan,""'and "Catholic" scorpi- 
ons; the former were somewhat bigger and stronger. However, 
these scorpions regularly withdrew from my head without 
doing me harm, when they perceived the purity of my nerves 
and the holiness of my purpose—this was one of the innumer- 
able triumphs which I have often experienced since then 
in a similar way. Just because the holiness of my purpose 
exerted too great a power of attraction on the souls, attempts 
were also made to falsify my mental individuality in all sorts 
of ways. "Jesuits," that is to say departed souls of former



Personal experiences continued . . .
Jesuits, repeatedly tried to put into my head a different "deter- 
minant nerve," which was to change my awareness of my own 
identity; the inner table of my skull was lined with a different 
brain membrane"'* in order to extinguish my memory of my 
own ego. All this without any permanent effect. Finally at- 
tempts were made to blacken my nerves by miraculously plac- 
ing the blackened nerves of other (deceased) human beings into 
my body, believing presumably that the blackness (impurity) 
of these nerves would be imparted to mine. Concerning these 
blackened nerves, I wish to mention a few names, the bearers 
of which were all said to have been in "Flechsig's hell," which 
made me assume that Professor Flechsig must have some 
power of disposal over these nerves. Among them was a cer- 
tain Bernhard Haase—^his name was by coincidence identical 
with that of a distant relative of mine—a bad sort, who was 
supposed to have committed some crime, a murder or such- 
like; further a certain R., a fellow-student and member of my 
Students' Union, who had gone to America because he had not 
made good and had led a rather dissolute life, and as far as I 
know was killed there in the War of Independence in 1864 or 
1865;™ finally a certain Julius Emil Haase who, despite his 
blackened nerves, gave the impression of a very honorable per- 
son. Presumably at the time of the Frankfurt attentat he was 
a senior member of the Students' Union and then became a



MEMOIRS
medical practitioner in Jena, if I heard correctly. Particularly 
interesting was that the soul of this Julius Emil Haase was 
even still able to give me certain medical advice by virtue of 
its scientific experience during its life; I want to add here that 
up to a point the same applied to my father's soul. The pres- 
ence of these blackened nerves in my body caused no lasting 
effect; they vanished in time without altering the condition of 
my nerves.
   I could relate still more miraculous events from the time of 
my stay in Flechsig's Asylum. I could tell of happenings which 
make me believe that popular belief that will-o'-the-wisps aie 
departed souls is true in many cases if not all; I could tell of 
wandering clocks, that is to say souls of departed heretics, said 
to have been preserved for centuries under glass in medieval 
cloisters (here too there is an undercurrent of something like a 
soul murder), who announced their survival by a vibration 
connected with an infinitely monotonous and doleful hum- 
ming noise (I myself received this impression by way of nerve- 
contact), etc., etc. To avoid becoming too discursive" I will 
now close my report about my experiences and memories of 
the time of my stay in Flechsig's Asylum.



Personal experiences while in 
Dr. Pierson's Asylum. 
"Tested souls"
8
IT IS EVIDENT from what I have related above that dur- 
ing the last months of my stay in Flechsig's Asylum I stood 
in dread of certain dangers which, since communication with 
rays had become indissoluble, seemed to threaten my body and 
my soul—dangers which had in fact already been partially real- 
ized. The most disgusting was the idea that my body, after the 
intended transformation into a female being, was to suffer 
some sexual abuse, particularly as there had even been talk for 
some time of my being thrown to the Asylum attendants for 
this purpose. Moreover the dread of "being forsaken" played a 
major role, so that every night I went to bed in my padded cell 
I doubted whether the door would open again at all in the 
morning; to be torn from the cell in the middle of the night in 
order to be drowned was another terrifying possibility which 
occupied my imagination, indeed was forced on to me by what 
was said by the voices.
   Therefore, when early one morning (perhaps mid-June 1894| 
three attendants appeared in my cell with a suitcase in which



MEMOIRS
were packed my few belongings, and told me that I was to get 
ready to leave the Asylum, my only reaction at first was a 
feeling of liberation from a place in which an infinite number 
of perils threatened me. I had no idea where the journey was 
to lead, nor did I think it worth inquiring, because I did not 
think these attendants were human beings at all, but only 
"fleeting-improvised-men."^^ The journey's goal left me indif- 
ferent; I felt only that I could not fare worse anywhere in the 
world than I had fared in Flechsig's Asylum; any change could 
therefore only be an improvement. Accompanied by the three 
attendants I left in a cab for Dresden Station, without seeing 
Professor Flechsig again. The streets of Leipzig through which 
we drove, particularly Augustusplatz, seemed strangely for- 
eign; as far as I remember they were completely deserted. This 
may have been because it was so early in the morning with 
its peculiar light; probably I caught the passenger train leaving 
about 5:30 a.m. Having lived for months among miracles, I 
was inclined to take more or less everything I saw for a mira- 
cle. Accordingly I did not know whether to take the streets 
of Leipzig through which I traveled as only theater props, per- 
haps in the fashion in which Prince Potemkin is said to have 
put them up for Empress Catherine II of Russia during 
her travels through the desolate country, so as to give her the 
impression of a flourishing countryside. At Dresden Station, 
it is true, I saw a fair number of people who gave the impres- 
sion of being railway passengers. But if it should be thought 
that my ideas of a vast change having come over mankind 
should have been thoroughly revised by my drive to the 
Station and the subsequent railway journey, I must observe 
that no sooner had I reached my new destination, than a



Personal experiences while . . .
new world of miracles surrounded me with such extraordinary 
visions that the impressions of my journey soon faded, or at 
least I had doubts of how I should interpret them. The railway 
journey proceeded with uncommon speed for a slow train or 
so I thought at the time,- my mood was such that I would 
have been ready any moment (had this been demanded) to 
throw myself on the railway line or to jump into the water 
while crossing the Elbe. After a journey of several hours we 
left the train at a Station which, I heard later, was supposed 
to have been Coswig; there we entered a cab which in about 
half an hour drove us to my new destination. Again, as I only 
learned several years later, it was supposed to have been Dr. 
Pierson's Private Asylum for the Insane; at the time I came 
to know the Asylum only by the name of "Devil's Kitchen" 
which the voices indicated to me. The senior attendant of 
the Asylum who had come to fetch me took his place on the 
coach-box; his name, as far as I can remember, was Marx, and 
I will shortly have more to say about him being somehow 
identical with von W.'s soul. The Asylum itself, a relatively 
small building in beautiful grounds, gave the impression of be- 
ing quite new. Everything seemed only just finished; not even 
the enamel paint on the stairs was fully dry. The three atten- 
dants from Flechsig's Asylum who had accompanied me soon 
retired and I did not see them again. I had time to look round 
my new abode."
r 1
101



MEMOIRS
   I will try to give a ground plan and sketch of Dr. Pierson's 
Asylum (the "Devil's Kitchen") also, because I thought at the 
time, and still think, that I can draw certain conclusions from 
the lay-out. The building where I was admitted had as far as I 
can remember only one story, that is to say it consisted of a 
ground floor and first floor; at some distance, separated by the 
grounds, was a second building which was supposed to repre- 
sent the female house of the Asylum. The ground plan of the 
upper story of the house into which I moved looked something 
like this:

   The ground floor was divided up slightly differently; it con- 
tained, among others, a bathroom, and otherwise consisted of a 
few big rooms; in the direction of the courtyard a door and a 
few steps led to the latter.
   The time I spent in Pierson's Asylum was when the wildest 
mischief through miracles was carried on, because all mira- 
cles, not creative for permanent and sensible purposes but 
mere aimless playing about, must be considered mischief even
 



Personal experiences while . .
if they provide the rays with temporary entertainment. At no 
other time were "fleeting-improvised-men" set down so ex- 
travagantly as then. The reasons for this statement will be- 
come apparent from what follows.
   I will start by first describing the circumstances of my out- 
ward life and how they developed in my new abode. I had no 
separate living-room; room b in the above sketch served as my 
bedroom. Day-time I usually spent in the common living-room 
or dining-room c, in which there was a constant coming and 
going of other presumed patients. In an attendant apparently 
employed for my special supervision I thought I recognized, 
perhaps because of an accidental likeness, the attendant of the 
Country Court who used to bring the files to my home during 
my six weeks of professional activity in Dresden; as I did not 
learn his name I will call him the "attendant of the Country 
Court." I naturally considered him, as all the other human 
shapes I saw, only as "fleetingly-improvised." Even now I can- 
not convince myself that this idea was wrong, because I defi- 
nitely remember for instance, seeing more than once during 
those very light June mornings, this "attendant of the Country 
Court" v/ho slept in a separate bed in my room, becoming one 
with his bed; that is to say I saw him gradually disappear, so 
that his bed was empty, without my having noticed that he got 
up or opened the door to leave the room. Further, this "atten- 
dant of the Country Court" had the habit of occasionally 
dressing in my clothes. A gentleman appeared occasionally— 
mostly in the evening hours—who was supposed to be the 
Medical Director of the Asylum and who again reminded me, 
because of a certain likeness, of Dr. O. in Dresden, whom I had 
consulted; this gentleman always appeared accompanied by 
the senior attendant, who will be described in more detail 
later, and I must now presume that it was Dr. Pierson; his con- 
versation was regularly confined to a few empty words. I only 
once entered the garden of the Asylum, and that on the day of



MEMOIRS
my arrival when I walked in it for about an hour. I saw there 
several ladies, among them Mrs. W., the wife of a Pastor in Fr., 
and my own mother, also several gentlemen, among them the 
Councillor of the Country Court K., of Dresden, with an un- 
gainly enlarged head. Even if I wanted to try to convince my- 
self now that I had only been deceived by fleeting similarities 
of external appearances, this would not suffice to explain to 
me the impressions I had at the time; I could understand such 
likeness occurring in two or three instances but not the fact 
that, as I will show, aimost all the patients in the Asylum, that 
is to say at least several dozen human beings, looked like per- 
sons who had been more or less close to me in my life.
   After that one walk in the garden proper the only time I was 
in the open air—for one to two hours every morning and after- 
noon—was in the above-mentioned courtyard or "pen"; this 
was about fifty yards square, shut in by walls, a desolate sand- 
pit without bush or shrub, with nothing to sit on but one or 
two wooden benches of the most primitive kind. Into this pen 
were crammed 40 to 50 human forms at the same time as my- 
self; judging from their appearances it was and is impossible 
for me to believe that they were really the patient population 
of a Private Asylum for the Insane. In such Private Asylums 
one finds as a rule only well-to-do patients, and only excep- 
tionally are really demented patients or idiots to be found 
there. But here I saw only extraordinary figures, among them 
fellows in linen overalls covered in soot. Almost all of them 
were silent and practically motionless; only a few used occa- 
sionally to utter certain fragmentary sounds, among them a 
gentlemen I thought was the Country Court Councillor W., 
who shouted continuously for a Miss Hering. During my peri- 
ods in the "pen" or even inside the Asylum I never heard any- 
thing among these supposed patients even faintly resembling a 
sensible conservation such as is carried on in Private Asylums 
among milder patients. They entered the common-room one




Personal experiences while . . .
after another, silently, and equally silently left it again, appar- 
ently without taking any notice of one another. At the same 
time I repeatedly witnessed that some of them changed heads 
during their stay in the common-room; that is to say, without 
leaving the room and while I was observing them, they sud- 
denly ran about with a different head. As far as I could observe 
there was no relationship whatever between the size of the 
Asylum and the number of patients whom I saw in the pen and 
in the common-room, partly simultaneously (particularly in 
the former), partly consecutively. It was then, and still is, my 
conviction that it was impossible for all the 40 to 50 people 
who were crammed into the pen simultaneously with me and 
who pushed towards the door of the house again every time 
the signal was given to return, to have found sleeping accom- 
modation in it for the night; I therefore thought and still think 
that some of them must have remained outside all the time, 
there to dissolve in a short time like the "fleeting-improvised- 
men" which indeed they were.
   At the most there were only four or six beds on the first 
floor of the Asylum where I lived; the ground floor, through 
which I had to pass each time I went out to the pen and re- 
turned from it, teemed with human forms most of the time, 
but could hardly have provided accommodation for the night 
for more than 10 or 12 human beings, even had there been a 
communal dormitory. And yet all these 40 to 50 visitors to the 
pen must have been more or less demented, because milder pa- 
tients, harmless to their environment, would hardly have been 
crammed into this desolate pen, so depriving them of the 
pleasure of a walk in the Asylum garden which actually ex- 
isted—the above-mentioned parklands. Of the shapes I remem- 
ber being in the pen, I wish to name Dr. Rudolph J. from 
Leipzig, a cousin of my wife, who had shot himself as early as 
1887; the likeness, except for being slightly smaller, was so 
striking that I had no doubt whatever of his identity. This



MEMOIRS
person ran about continuously with a bundle of newspapers 
or other papers, which he used only to provide himself with 
something soft to sit upon on the hard wooden benches,- also 
there was the Senior Prosecutor B,, who remained immobile in 
a bent, devout, almost praying posture. The voices called some 
of those present the shapes in which "with regard to the 
Determining fourth and fifth" (to be supplemented by a word 
like "dimension" which I did not clearly understand)^" and his 
subterranean antipodes (the fellows in linen overalls) covered 
with soot were "set down" (embodied). Inside the Asylum I 
saw among others Dr. W. in two different shapes, one more 
perfect and the other more degenerate, the latter having been 
allotted him in the transmigration of souls,- President of the 
Senate of a Court Dr. F., the Country Court Councillor Dr. M., 
the Lawyer W. from Leipzig (a friend of my youth), my nephew 
Fritz, etc. In another gentleman who apparently occupied room 
/ beyond the staircase of the above ground plan, and whom I 
thought I had seen before when I arrived at Coswig Station 
walking up and down as if he were looking for somebody, I 
thought I recognized Mr. von O. of Mecklenburg, whose fleet- 
ing acquaintance I had made during a holiday at Warnemünde. 
His room was hung with very peculiar pictures (on paper) 
mostly colored red, and was filled by that singular smell which 
I called the Devil's stench in Chapter 1. Once I noticed from 
the window my father-in-law on the drive leading to the 
Asylum; about that time I also had a number of his nerves in 
my body and from their behavior in conversation by way of



Personal experiences while . . .
nerve-contact I clearly recognized my father-in-law's nature. I 
also saw repeatedly a number of persons (4-5), once even a few 
ladies, entering the corner rooms a and d of the above ground 
plan, after they had passed the common-room; they must then 
have vanished in those rooms.^° They had, as the ground plan 
shows, no other exit than through the common-room. When, 
after an interval during which I did not leave the common- 
room, I looked through the open door into those rooms, there 
was either nobody left in them or only a single person in the 
corner room d, the person whom I call Dr. W. lying in bed with 
all sorts of peculiar adornments of silken ribbons, etc., with 
which he had "miraculously provided himself" as it was said 
at the time.
   Miracles affected not only human forms but also lifeless 
objects. However skeptical I try to be now in scrutinizing my 
recollections, I cannot erase certain impressions from my mem- 
ory, in which I saw even articles of clothing on the bodies of 
human beings being transformed, as well as food on my plate 
during meals (for instance pork into veal or vice versa), etc. One 
day—in bright daylight—I saw from my window directly in 
front of the walls of the building where I lived, a magnificent 
portico arise, just as if the whole building were going to be 
transformed into a fairy palace; later the image vanished, sup- 
posedly because the completion of the intended divine miracle 
was prevented by Flechsig's and von W.'s counter-miracles; the 
picture still stands out very clearly in my memory.
   The senior attendant of the Asylum deserves special men- 
tion. On the very day of my arrival the voices said that he was 
identical with my fellow lodger v. W.; he was said to have given 
false evidence about me in some State inquiry, either on pur- 
pose or through carelessness, and particularly to have accused



MEMOIRS
me of masturbation; as punishment for this he had now to be 
my servant in the form of a fleeting-improvised-man.''
   It seems impossible that I should spontaneously have ar- 
rived at such ideas myself, because I never had any disagree- 
ments with or harbored any grudge against Mr. v. W. with 
whom in any case I had only the honor of a fleeting acquain- 
tance. The voices continuously tried to incite me against this 
senior attendant; on my very first day it was demanded that I 
address him as "W.," thereby insulting him by omitting his 
title; at first I did not at all want to, but finally did just once to 
get rid of the pressing voices. On a later occasion I even boxed 
his ears; I cannot remember my immediate incentive, but I do 
know that, as he had made some unfair demand on me, the 
voices challenged and mocked me for my apparent lack of 
manly courage until at last I struck him. I have already men- 
tioned in Chapter 1 that on certain occasions I saw on the sen- 
ior attendant's face and hands the red color peculiar to Devils; 
what I shall relate later leaves me in no doubt that he really 
had V. W.'s nerves, at least in part.
   I did not undertake any mental or physical occupation dur- 
ing my short stay in Dr. Pierson's Asylum ("Devil's Kitchen"|; 
my attention was taken up almost all day entirely by the con- 
versation of the voices and by amazement at the miraculous 
things which were happening around me. In retrospect it 
seems very striking now that there was no such thing as a
108



Personal experiences while . . .
communal meal; as far as I remember having had meals there, 
a table was laid for me in the common-room; apart from my- 
self one or two other patients at the most used to eat there too. 
I remember once that I threw the dish (fried sausage) out of the 
window, perhaps breaking the window pane in the act; but I 
cannot clearly remember my motive for this.
   Naturally the souls with whom I was in nerve-contact in 
Flechsig's Asylum followed me to my new abode as they had 
done on my journey there: above all Flechsig's soul itself, try- 
ing to intensify the battle it had started against God's omnipo- 
tence, had formed a kind of party-following of more or less 
friendly souls whom it pulled along. Belonging to this party- 
following, apart from the "Cassiopeia brothers" mentioned in 
Chapter 5, there was a group designated at the time as "the 
Advancing"; it consisted of Daniel Fürchtegott Flechsig's soul 
(which existed in two shapes), and those of the Senior District 
Court Councillor G. and an anterior column leader previously 
belonging to God's omnipotence, "with regard to the Deter- 
mining first," a sort of renegade who had submitted to 
Flechsig's influence. The "suspended under Cassiopeia" (that 
is souls formerly members of the Students' Corps Saxonia) dis- 
appeared during my stay in Pierson's Asylum; they were 
pushed back into their graves "by a strong hand," an event I 
witnessed with my mind's eye, hearing at the same time the 
wailing (a kind of whimpering) with which the souls accompa- 
nied this event which they naturally did not wish for, because 
it meant the loss of that state of Blessedness which they had 
surreptitiously attained. A number of other souls appeared in 
their place; this resulted preponderantly from a partition of 
souls—an abuse presumably first introduced by Flechsig's soul. 
Even if the physical possibility of a partition of souls men- 
tioned in footnote 9 Chapter 1 had existed previously, it is 
hardly likely that as long as the Order of the World was intact, 
use would have been made of a measure so humiliating to



MEMOIRS
human feeling. There could have been no good reason to allow 
the soul of a human being to ascend to a state of Blessedness 
with a certain number of its nerves, while the other part 
was placed in a position of punishment. I am inclined rather 
to believe that the natural unity of the human soul used to be 
respected; thus in the case of nerves too greatly blackened, 
to cleanse all of which would have required too great an 
expenditure of pure rays, only a small number of nerves was 
cleansed (this meant that a particular human soul was granted 
the state of Blessedness for a shorter time only, compare 
Chapter 1), the rest simply being left to rot in the grave. But, as 
mentioned, Flechsig's soul introduced the partition of souls 
mainly in order to occupy the whole heavenly vault with parts 
of souls so that divine rays, following some power of attrac- 
tion, met resistance on all sides. The picture which I have 
in my mind is extremely difficult to express in words,- it ap- 
peared that nerves—probably taken from my body—were strung 
over the whole heavenly vault, which the divine rays were not 
able to surmount, or which at least constituted a mechanical 
obstacle similar to the way a besieged fortress is protected by 
walls and moats against the onrush of the enemy. For this pur- 
pose Flechsig's soul had split into a great number of soul parts, 
of which there existed for a time about 40 to 60, amongst them 
many tiny ones presumably consisting of but a single nerve; 
two bigger soul parts were called the "superior Flechsig" and 
the "middle Flechsig"; the former used temporarily to be 
marked out by greater purity because of divine rays which he 
had appropriated but which usually did not last long. Similarly 
there were later also 20 to 30 von W.'s soul parts, even a joint 
V. W.-Flechsig's soul, to which I might refer again.
   The causes which led to the appearance of von W.'s soul in 
the sky (besides Flechsig's) I can only guess, though probably 
with some accuracy. All "tested" (Flechsig's, etc.) souls owe 
their existence fundamentally to the power of attraction which



Personal experiences while . . .
had developed in my body through excessive over-excitement 
of my nerves; that is to say I was for them only a means to an 
end to capture the divine rays brought nearer by the power of 
attraction with which they then adorned themselves, like a 
peacock with strange feathers, so attaining the gift of miracles, 
etc. For this reason it was important for them to have a certain 
power of control over my body. While I was in the Leipzig 
Asylum this power of control seems to have been exerted by 
Flechsig's soul in combination with the real Professor Flechsig, 
still present as a human being (or a "fleeting-improvised-man"; 
what he actually was at the time I must leave undecided]. This 
influence ceased with my transfer to Dr. Pierson's Asylum 
("Devil's Kitchen"); the actual power over my body then fell to 
the staff of that Asylum, particularly to the senior attendant. 
This seems to have caused Flechsig's soul to draw up to heaven, 
perhaps even to a state of Blessedness, some of the nerves 
taken from the senior attendant, but in reality v. W.'s nerves, 
in order to regain his lost influence over me through these 
nerves and through their influence on the senior attendant.
   At the beginning it was said that only three v. W.'s nerve fil- 
aments were involved; but these having once obtained aware- 
ness of their heavenly existence and at the same time of their 
gift of miracles, soon complemented themselves into one fairly 
substantial soul by drawing up a larger number of other von W.'s 
nerves (out of the grave as I had to assume at the time). Natu- 
rally these too were impure nerves; in other words a second 
"tested soul" was now in the sky, inspired only by a selfish 
striving for self-preservation and lust for power contrary to the 
Order of the World and opposing God's omnipotence; to this 
purpose it abused my nerves' power of attraction on divine 
rays. In general it recognized the leadership of Flechsig's soul, 
which remained as before the spiritual leader of the whole re- 
bellion against God's omnipotence; in some respects however 
it maintained a certain independence in contra-distinction to
1
HI



MEMOIRS
the other souls which formed Flechsig's following. For exam- 
ple, as already mentioned, it permitted an extensive partition 
of souls, but in other respects went its own way.
   My position was made considerably more difficult through 
the addition of this second "tested soul"; for this soul also 
started to work miracles in my body which in part were of a 
highly damaging nature, about which I will say more later. On 
the other hand it also provoked some amusing effects, even 
lending to my otherwise gloomy existence, if I may put it like 
this, a touch of the comic. That these nerves which had thus 
attained a sort of heavenly power were really von W.'s seems to 
me beyond doubt; for I repeatedly conversed with von W.'s soul 
about its recollections from life, particularly about its student 
days in the Students' Corps Misnia, right down to the well- 
known waiter B. in the Public House Gosen at Eutritzsch near 
Leipzig. At times it was highly amusing to observe how both 
souls—Flechsig's and von W.'s—in spite of their alliance against 
God's omnipotence, mutually repelled one another, because of 
the professorial arrogance of the one and the pride of nobility 
of the other. Von W.'s soul, full of "von W.'s House- and 
Primogenitor-Order" which it was going to establish in heaven 
and on which it was going to found its "world domination," 
was fundamentally unsympathetic to the soul of the national- 
liberal Professor Flechsig and at times would hear no good of it 
at all. The latter in turn, possessed by its intellectual superior- 
ity, looked on von W.'s soul, with some contempt. Von W.'s 
soul showed other distinctly aristocratic traits, and temporar- 
ily paid me more respect, as when it noticed that I brought the 
fork to my mouth with my left hand; it showed a particular in- 
terest in a well-kept table d'hôte, ana had also a greater orga- 
nizing talent than Flechsig's soul, insofar as it was more 
economical with the rays it had appropriated, therefore usually 
appeared more radiant, and for some time it kept a proper "mag- 
azine of rays jl could still indicate where it was in the sky).



Personal experiences while . . .
   I want to add a little more about my other supernatural im- 
pressions in Pierson's Asylum. So-called Moonshine-Blessedness 
fluttered towards me in long flights (the image is hard to de- 
scribe, one might perhaps compare it with so-called gossamer, 
not in single threads but in a kind of denser texture); this was 
to represent the female state of Blessedness. It was of two 
kinds, one flatter and one more robust; perhaps the former can 
be regarded as Child-Blessedness. Further information was added 
to the idea of the end of the world mentioned in previous chap- 
ters, in how far a revival of the created world was possible; at 
one time it was said it would only extend to the fishes, at an- 
other as far as the lower mammals, etc. I must leave undecided 
how far this information was based only on apprehension for 
the future or whether it was founded on reality. But I must 
assume that on a distant star, probably by using part of my 
nerves, the attempt was actually made to create a new human 
world ("new human beings out of Schreber's spirit," as it has 
been called innumerable times since then, mostly meant in a 
mocking spirit). It remains a mystery how the necessary time 
for this was to be found; I thought then and automatically still 
think of the ideas developed in du Prel's work quoted in 
footnote 36 (in the Appendix as far as I remember) according 
to which a difference in space also means a difference in 
time. These "new human beings out of Schreber's spirit"— 
physically of a much smaller stature than our earthly human 
beings—were said to have already achieved a fairly remarkable 
degree of culture, to have kept small cattle proportionate to 
their own size, etc. I myself was said to have received divine 
veneration as their "National Saint" so to speak, as if my phys- 
ical posture (particularly in the pen of Piersons Asylum) 
were of some significance for their faith. Those of their souls 
which had ascended to a state of Blessedness after death were 
said to have attained to rays of fairly substantial vigor.
   I assume that there must have been some truth in the



MEMOIRS
matter because at that time I had the "God" or "Apostle" of 
these little people—that is to say presumably the aggregate of 
the rays which were derived from their states of Blessedness— 
as a soul in my body, more specifically in my belly." This little 
"God" or "Apostle" surpassed all other souls by virtue of a 
practical turn of mind—a fundamental trait of my own charac- 
ter (I cannot suppress some self-praise here)—so that in a way 
I recognized in him flesh of my flesh and blood of my blood. 
But in order to mislead me a falsified counterpart was put up 
against this little "God" or "Apostle"—just as in many other 
cases, for instance respecting my father's soul, the souls of the 
Jesuits, etc. Usually I noticed these falsifications very quickly, 
because it was easy to distinguish the true from the false by 
the character of the respective souls. There was also much talk 
at that time of a "law for the restoration of the rays," that 
is to say of the principle—of which the "little people out of 
Schreber's spirit" would have been an example—that new rays 
come forth from the faith of departed human beings. This idea 
seems to accord with what has been said above in footnote 11, 
Chapter 1, about the origin of the "forecourts of heaven."
   Flechsig's soul was at that time leader of two "suns," in- 
cluding the one from which daylight emanated. The picture I 
have in my mind of how the leading soul was situated, as it 
were, behind the sun, is impossible to describe in words. Von 
W.'s soul also was to be trusted with the leadership of a sun, 
but in general it showed little inclination towards it.




Transfer to Sonnenstein.
Changes in the contact 
with rays. "The writing-
down-system"; "Tying- 
to-celestial-b odies"

ONE FINE DAY (after a total stay of 8-14 days) I was taken 
from Dr. Pierson's Asylum, "the Devil's Kitchen," to this 
Country Asylum Sonnenstein near Pirna—I later learnt that it 
was on the 29th of June 1894.1 do not know the reasons for my 
transfer; at the time 1 felt I had to connect it with the tremen- 
dously increased influence of von W.'s soul during the last days 
of my stay in the Devil's Kitchen, which had to be counter- 
balanced in some way. I had a warm bath before I left—the 
only one in Dr. Pierson's Asylum. I then traveled by cab (as on 
my way there) accompanied by the "Coimtry Court attendant" 
to Coswig Station; having drunk a cup of coffee there, I trav- 
eled by train via Dresden to Pima without leaving the carriage. 
The human forms I saw during the journey and on the plat- 
form in Dresden I took to be "fleeting-improvised-men" pro- 
duced by miracle; I did not pay any particular attention to 
them, because even then I was tired of all miracles. I was 
strengthened in my attitude by what the voices said; Flechsig's




MEMOIRS
soul used an expression it had invented of "fossilized."** Dres- 
den, through which we were supposed to have traveled. From 
Pirna Station I traveled in a cab on a rather bumpy road up to 
this Asylum. More than a year elapsed before I realized that I 
had been brought to Pima and to Sonnenstein, when, on one of 
the very few occasions I had access to the "Museum" (com- 
mon-room) of the Asylum, I saw pictures of earlier Kings of 
Saxony on the walls. When I first arrived the voices called the 
place "The Devil's Castle." I still occupy the same rooms I was 
given then—number 28 on the first floor of the Elbe wing, with 
an adjoining bedroom. A few times I temporarily had a different 
living-room because of some alterations and decorations; the 
bedroom destined for me, however—as I will mention again 
later—^I did not use for about two years but slept in padded 
cells, particularly number 97 of the round wing on the ground 
floor. In contrast to the fairly elegantly furnished Asylum of 
Dr. Pierson, the rooms struck me as rather poor at first. I also 
wish to mention that for about a year I did not have the view 
from my windows which now offers itself freely to me over the 
whole Elbe Valley. There were some dense chestnut trees, 
since felled, which at the time obstructed the view almost 
completely, so that even by looking out of the windows I could 
not learn anything of what went on in the outside world.
   I can divide the time of my stay at Sonnenstein into two 
periods, of which the first on the whole still retained that seri- 
ous, holy and sometimes awesome quality which characterized 
my life in the latter part of my stay in Flechsig's Asylum and



Transfer to Sonnenstein . . .
in Dr. Pierson's Asylum; in centra-distinction the second period 
merged gradually more and more into ordinary (not to say vul- 
gar) channels. The first period lasted about a year; the second 
period continues, modified of late only by becoming less vul- 
gar in some respects. In the first period the miracles were still 
terrifying and threatening in their bodily and mental effects, so 
that for a long time I was most seriously concerned for my life, 
my manliness and later my reason; in the second period—nat- 
urally very gradually and not without some set backs—the 
miracles became increasingly harmless, not to say senseless 
and childish, although to some extent still repugnant.
   In the first period I was still convinced that I was dealing 
not with real human beings but "fleeting-improvised-men. "'^' 
I still cannot see that this was an error on my part; from what 
I experienced at the time and still experience daily I must 
rather leave open the possibility that I was right; in other 
words the so-called "play-with-human-beings" has only gradu- 
ally changed to that state in which, now regarded from out- 
side, it would appear that mankind had not changed. In order 
to make this idea, which is hard to understand and not even 
completely clear to me, somewhat comprehensible, I must 
first give an account of the conditions of my external environ- 
ment during the first years of my stay in this Asylum. Of the 
doctors of the Asylum, I got to know the Superintendent of the 
Asylum, Dr. Weber, and his assistant Dr. R., at first only in 
person and not by name, on the very first day during a physical 
examination in the bathroom (on the ground floor) when a 
stethoscope was used; I only learnt their names by chance at 
the end of a year or more. I have since received daily visits 
from these gentlemen; apart from them I only occasionally 
saw the senior attendant R. and a few attendants (M., Th.)



MEMOIRS
and Sch. who has since left. M. was the attendant particularly 
charged with my care.
   Other patients did not seem to exist in the Asylum at the 
time; at least on the corridor which I inhabited where there 
were nine rooms I did not notice any,- only after some time 
had elapsed did I notice one patient addressed as Prince 
J sky and a second as Mr. B., the latter particularly 
through his playing the violin. Even during my daily walks in 
the garden of the Asylum with two or three attendants (the 
above-mentioned) I was always alone during the first months,- 
at that time there was nothing to be seen of the large number 
of other patients of whom I now see up to 80 and 100 with me 
in the garden. The voices called the attendants "rascals" (com- 
pare footnote 56); I must assume that they had the properties 
of "fleeting-improvised-men" (and therefore were really souls)^ 
because they kept up nerve-contact with me in which 1 fre- 
quently heard from them expressions belonging to the basic 
language; I heard phrases, particularly from the attendant Sch., 
which in the basic language serve to express astonishment— 
"Good Heavens" and "Hail and Thunder"—(not aloud but in 
the nerve-language) while he personally was in another room. 
At times M. and Sch. unloaded into my body a part of their 
bodies in the form of a foul mass in order "to remove them- 
selves"; M. repeatedly placed himself into my arm as a so- 
called "large nerve" (a jelly-like mass about the size of a 
cherry) through which in a certain sense he participated in my 
thinking and my sensations like the other rays or nerves. The 
"rascals," in their capacity as souls, were said to have the gift 
of miracles; at certain special events there was talk of "rascals' 
miracles," through which these were said to have come about.
   My wife visited me at Sonnenstein at longish intervals— 
probably of a few months. I was petrified when I saw her the 
first time entering my room on such a visit; I had long believed 
she was no more among the living. This belief was based on



Transfer to Sonnenstein . . .
very definite evidence—as also in the case of other human be- 
ings—so that my wife's reappearance remains an unsolved rid- 
dle to this day. I repeatedly had the nerves belonging to my 
wife's soul in my body or felt them approaching my body from 
outside—here again the certainty of my memory leaves no 
room for doubt about the objective reality of the event. These 
soul parts were filled with the devoted love which my wife 
has always shown mc; they were the only souls who showed 
willingness to renounce their own further existence and find 
their end in my body^ expressing it in the basic language as 
"let me.""
   When my wife visited me in person at Sonnenstein I believed 
for a long time that she was only "fleetingly-improvised" for 
the occasion,- and that she would therefore dissolve, perhaps 
even on the stairs or directly after leaving the Asylum. It was 
said that her nerves would be "encapsulated" again after every 
visit. On one of her visits—probably on my birthday in 1894— 
my wife brought me a poem, which I reproduce here word for 
word because it made such a deep impression on me at the 
time. It went as follows:
Ere true peace can embrace you— 
God's still and silent peace— 
The peace life never giveth 
Nor worldy joys beneath, 
It needs God's arm must strike 
A blow and wound you deep, 
So that you cry: Have mercy, 
God, have mercy on my days;
119



MEMOIRS
It needs a cry must ring, 
Ring from your soul 
And darkness be within you 
As 'fore the world's first day. 
It needs that crushing pain 
Must wholly vanquish you, 
And not a lonely tear be left 
In your poor wretched soul.
And when you've done with weeping
And weary art^ so weary, 
Then comes to you a faithful guest 
God's still and silent peace.
   This poem, by an unknown author, made such a singular 
impression on me because the phrase "God's peace" which re- 
curs in it, is the expression used in the basic language for sleep 
produced by rays which I heard innumerable times before and 
since. At the time I could hardly believe that this was mere co- 
incidence.
   During the first weeks of my stay at Sonnenstein (in early 
luly 1894), certain changes occurred both in my longstanding 
nerve communication with rays, and closely related with it in 
the heavenly conditions; these seem to have been of funda- 
mental importance for the whole period of time which has 
since passed. Again it is extremely difficult to describe these 
changes in words because matters are dealt with which lack all 
analogies in human experience and which I appreciated di- 
rectly only in part with my mind's eye,'*' in part only by their



Transfer to Sonnenstein . . .
effects, so that I may have formed but an approximate picture. 
In the previous chapter it was related that the number of 
"tested" souls and soul parts present in the sky had increased 
markedly through soul-division. Among these souls Flechsig's, 
which had for a time retained a fair proportion of its human in- 
telligence in virtue of the size of its two main forms (as "supe- 
rior Flechsig" and as "middle Flechsig"), was still prominent; 
in the course of years, however, it progressively lost its intelli- 
gence so that now hardly a trace of awareness of its own iden- 
tity remains. For my part I was always led by the desire to 
draw these souls and soul parts to myself and so ultimately 
to cause their dissolution; I started from the perfectly sound 
supposition that when all "tested" or impure souls had been 
eliminated from their position of so-called middle instances 
between myself and God's omnipotence, a solution of the 
conflict in consonance with the Order of the World would fol- 
low automatically; either a cure by a complete calming of 
my nerves through sleep, or—a possibility I later considered— 
unmanning, in consonance with the Order of the World, with 
the purpose of creating new human beings. These "tested" 
souls, however, were possessed only by the opposite endeavor, 
namely to assert themselves in their usurped heavenly posi- 
tion which gave them the gift of miracles; whenever they came 
closer they tried to withdraw again by pushing other souls or 
soul parts in turn into the foreground.
   One night—perhaps the fourth or fifth after my arrival at



MEMOIRS
Sonnenstein—^I succeeded with immense mental effort in tem- 
porarily drawing down to myself all impure ("tested") souls; it 
would only have required a thorough "covering with rays" for 
my recovery through one nerve-restoring sleep and with it the 
disappearance of the impure souls. (Unfortunately one could 
not decide to adopt this course for the reason mentioned previ- 
ously.) In consequence Flechsig's soul took special measures to 
exclude the recurrence of such a danger to its existence and to 
that of other impure souls. It resorted to mechanical fastening 
as an expedient; a technique of which I was only able to get a 
rough idea. This mechanical fastening first occurred in a looser 
form called "tying-to-rays," where the word "rays" seems to 
have been used in a special sense which I did not fully under- 
stand. I can only describe the picture I saw with my mind's 
eye. According to this the souls hung on a kind of bundle of 
rods (like the fasces of the Roman Lictors), but in such a man- 
ner that the rods spread out below like a cone, while the 
nerves of the souls were tied fast around the upper points. 
When this looser form of fastening seemed not to afford suffi- 
cient defense against my pov/er of attraction and the danger of 
dissolving in my body, a more resistant form was chosen 
which was called "tying-to-celestial-bodies." As the expres- 
sion denotes, a tying to some distant stars occurred which 
from then on excluded the possibility of a complete dissolu- 
tion in my body in consequence of my power of attraction; on 
the contrary withdrawal was safeguarded through the mechan- 
ical fastening so established. When the "middle Flechsig" used 
this form of fastening for the first time, it was felt in God's 
realms that behavior so contrary to the Order of the World 
could not be tolerated. The "middle Flechsig" was therefore 
forced to untie himself again. But when the experiment was 
later repeated there was no longer sufficient energy for such 
measures; the tying was permitted, in which not only all other 
Flechsig soul parts participated, but also the souls in their



Transfer to Sonnenstein . . .
train, particularly that of v. W. and finally God's omnipotence 
itself. In this way "tying-to-celestial-bodies" became a perma- 
nent institution continuing to the present day and led to fur- 
ther consequences, particularly the "writing-down-system," 
now to be described. I realize that such a conception, according 
to which one must think of my body on our earth as connected 
to other stars by stretched out nerves, is almost incomprehen- 
sible to other people considering the immense distances in- 
volved; for me however as a result of my daily experiences ovei 
the last six years there can be no doubt as to the objective real- 
ity of this relation.
   The mentioned writing-down-system is extraordinarily dif- 
ficult to explain to other people even vaguely. That it exists is 
overwhelmingly proved to me day after day,- yet it belongs 
even for me to the realm of the unfathomable because the ob- 
jective it pursues must be recognized by all who know human 
nature as something in itself unattainable. It is obviously a 
stop-gap measure and it is difficult to decide whether it arises 
from a wrong |that is contrary to the Order of the World) intent 
or from faulty reasoning.
   Books or other notes are kept in which for years have been 
wiitten-down all my thoughts, all my phrases, all my neces- 
saries, all the articles in my possession or around me, all 
persons with whom I come into contact, etc. I cannot say 
with certainty who does the writing down. As I cannot imag- 
ine God's omnipotence lacks all intelligence, I presume that 
the writing-down is done by creatures given human shape 
on distant celestial bodies after the manner of the fleeting- 
improvised-men, but lacking all intelligence; their hands are 
led automatically, as it were, by passing rays for the purpose of 
making them write-down, so that later rays can again look at 
what has been written.
   To illuminate the purpose of this whole system I must en- 
large further. All the attacks made over the years, on my life.



MEMOIRS
my bodily integrity, my manliness and my reason, were and 
still are based on the same idea: to withdraw again as far as 
possible from the power of attraction of my over-excited 
nerves, which far surpasses anything that has ever existed be- 
fore. To that end one at first considered my unmanning^ appar- 
ently in recognition of the fundamental tendency of the Order 
of the World (see Chapter 5). This was not unmanning aimed 
at renewing mankind in consonance with World Order, but 
only an intended insult, for in a peculiar way it was imagined, 
or perhaps wishfully thought, that an unmanned body would 
lose its power of attraction for the rays. Years after my arrival 
at Sonnenstein, the idea of unmanning still appeared, if I may 
so express myself, in the minds of the souls. Small parts of 
Flechsig's soul which were distant, and therefore not in con- 
tact with my nerves for quite some time, used repeatedly to 
exclaim as if astonished: "Is he not unmanned yet?" God's rays 
frequently mocked me about a supposedly imminent unman- 
ning as "Miss Schreber" [in English in the original]; an expres- 
sion used frequently and repeated ad nauseam was: "You are 
to be lepiesented as given to voluptuous excesses,"'^ etc. I my- 
self felt the danger of unmanning for a long time as a threaten- 
ing ignominy, especially while there was the possibility oí my 
body being sexually abused by other people.
   For over a year therefore the female nerves, or nerves of 
voluptuousness, which had penetrated my body in great masses.



Transfer to Sonnenstein . . .
could not gain any influence on my behavior or on my way of 
thinking. I suppressed every feminine impulse by exerting my 
sense of manly honor and also by the holiness of my religious 
ideas, which occupied me almost exclusively,- indeed I really 
became aware of the presence of female nerves only when they 
were artificially set in vibration by rays on certain occasions so 
as to produce a sensation of timidity and to "respresent" me 
as a human being trembling with feminine anxiety. On the 
other hand my will power could not prevent the occurrence, 
particularly when lying in bed, of a sensation of voluptuous- 
ness which as so-called "soul-voluptuousness" exerted an in- 
creased power of attraction on the rays; this expression used by 
the souls meant a voluptuousness sufficient for souls but felt 
by human beings only as general bodily well-being without real 
sexual excitement. (Compare Chapter 7 towards the end.)
   With this phenomenon becoming increasingly manifest in 
the course of time, God might have become aware that un- 
manning was not a way of ''forsaking" me, that is of freeing 
Himself again from the power of attraction of my nerves. From 
this the idea arose to "retain me on the mascuhne side, " but— 
again under basically false pretenses—not in order to restore 
my health, but to destroy my reason or to make me demented. 
Again one paid no attention to the fact that the nerves, even of 
a demented human being, would in a state of highly pathologi- 
cal excitement retain their power of attraction—provided, of



MEMOIRS
course, that they were still generally capable of sensation as of 
pain, voluptuousness, hunger, cold, etc. Incessantly therefore, 
day after day and hour after hour, poison of corpses and other 
putrid matter which the rays carried was heaped upon my 
body, in the belief that it would be possible in this way to suf- 
focate me eventually and in particular to rob me of my reason. 
In the next chapter I will relate what temporary damage was 
thus wrought on my body in a most threatening manner.
   I have reason to assume that the poison of corpses or the 
putrid matter was taken from the same celestial bodies to 
which the rays had been tied^ and where they were packed as it 
were with it or soaked it up in passing. Some of the rays had 
been given the shape of miracled birds about which I shall 
have more to say later. It became apparent that the tested souls 
which were still in heaven, and what had remained of the erst- 
while forecourts of heaven, which one had kept in reserve in 
order to be able to take refuge behind them, had in the course 
of time totally lost their intelligence, that is to say they had no 
thoughts of their own left. On the other hand it seems to lie in 
the nature of rays that they must speak as soon as they are in 
motion; the relevant law was expressed in the phrase "do not 
forget that rays must speak," and this was spoken into my 
nerves innumerable times, particularly early on. But in fact for 
years, lacking their own thoughts, they have spoken of nothing 
but their own miracles, falsely attributing fear of them to my 
nerves (for instance, "If only my fingers were not paralyzed," 
or "If only miracles would not affect my knee-cap")j further, 
everything I was about to do was cursed (for instance, "If only 
the cursed piano-playing would cease," as soon as I sit down at 
the piano, or even "If only the cursed cleaning of nails would 
cease," as soon as I start cleaning my nails). Over and above this 
one has the boundless impudence—I can use no other expres- 
sion—to demand that I should express this falsified nonsense 
in spoken words as if it were my own thoughts, in this fashion:



Transfer to Sonnenstein . .
"If only the cursed piano-playing would cease" was followed by 
the question: "Why don't you say it (aloud)?," and this again was 
followed by the falsified answer: "Because I am stupid, perhaps," 
or again "Because I am frightened of Mr. M." (compare footnote 
26, Chapter 5). Naturally there are now also pauses in which 
there is nothing to report of miracles directed against my person, 
nor any definite "thought of resolution" to undertake this or 
that occupation which the rays, being able to read my thoughts, 
can recognize; in other words, when I indulge in thinking 
nothing, particularly at night when I sleep or in day-time when 
I temporarily rest or walk about in the garden without thinking, 
etc. The writing-down-material, mainly my previous thoughts 
besides a few constantly recurring additions of more or less 
senseless and partly offensive phrases, vulgar terms of abuse, 
etc., serves to fill in these pauses (that is to say to give the rays 
something to talk about even during these pauses). I will per- 
haps append an anthology of these phrases to the present essay 
in order to give the reader at least some inkling of the non- 
sense my nerves have for years had to put up with.
   The offensive phrases and abusive words serve the particular 
purpose of inciting me to talk aloud and so to make sleep im- 
possible at the proper times; for the whole policy of souls cul- 
minates in the prevention of sleep and soul-voluptuousness; 
but the aim of the whole policy remains totally obscure. The 
writing-down also serves as another peculiar trick which again 
is based on a total misunderstanding of human thinking. It 
was believed that my store of thoughts could be exhausted by 
being written-down, so that eventually the time would come 
when new ideas could no longer appear in me; this of course is 
quite absurd, because human thinking is inexhaustible; for 
instance reading a book or a newspaper always stimulates 
new thoughts. This was the trick: as soon as an idea I had 
had before and which was (already) written-down, recurred— 
such a recurrence is of course quite unavoidable in the case of



MEMOIRS
many thoughts, for instance the thought in the morning "Now 
I will wash" or when playing the piano the thought "This is a 
beautiful passage," etc.—as soon as such a budding thought 
was spotted in me, the approaching rays were sent down with 
the phrase "We have already got this," scilicet written-down; 
in a manner hard to describe the rays were thereby made unre- 
ceptive to the power of attraction oí such a thought.
   I must deny myself expounding the writing-down-system 
and its consequences further; it would in any case be im- 
possible to make this fully clear to anyone who has not had 
the same experience on his own nerves. I can only give the 
assurance that the writing-down-system and particularly 
the intrusion of "We have already got this" when any of my 
earlier thoughts recurred, became a mental torture, from 
which I suffered severely for years and to which I am only 
slowly getting a little accustomed; because of it, I had to 
endure trials of patience as they have probably never before 
had to be borne by a human being,*' made all the worse by



Transfer to Sonnenstein . . .
the difficulties of my outward circumstances (restriction of 
freedom, etc.).
   I have only to add that in the above description I have antic- 
ipated somewhat in time for the sake of coherence; in actual 
fact the development described belongs in part to a much later 
period, for instance there was no question of playing the piano, 
which I mentioned above, for almost a year after my arrival at 
Sonnenstein.



Personal experiences at 
Sonnenstein. "Interferences" 
accompanying contact with 
the rays. "Creation of a 
false feeling"
10
DURING THE FIRST weeks of my stay at Sonnenstein (in 
July or August 1894), I am convinced certain important changes 
took place with the sun. As before when discussing super- 
natural matters, I have to confine myself to relating impres- 
sions which I received and can only conjecture in how far these 
changes were objective events. I recollect that for a longish pe- 
riod there appeared to be a smaller sun. This sun, as men- 
tioned at the end of Chapter 8, was first led by Flechsig's soul 
but later by a soul whose nerves I identified as those of the 
Director of the present Ayslum, Dr. Weber. While writing 
these lines I am fully aware that other people can only think 
this is sheer nonsense, as Dr. Weber is still among the living, a 
fact I myself have occasion to verify daily. Yet the impressions 
I received seem to me so certain that I must assume that some 
time in the past Dr. Weber departed from this life and as- 
cended with his nerves to Blessedness, but then returned to 
life among mankind; this notion may be unfathomable for hu- 
man beings and a possibility only to be explained in a super-



Personal experiences at Sonnenstein . . .
natural manner.""* After the power of its rays had been exhausted 
this smaller sun was then probably replaced by another sun. 
For several days and nights I had at that time the most wonder- 
ful and magnificent impressions as already mentioned in foot- 
note II, Chapter 1; in my opinion this was the time when the 
anterior realms of God had been exhausted and the posterior 
realms of God appeared on the scene for the first time.
   I believe I may say that at that time and at that time only, 
I saw God's omnipotence in its complete purity. During the 
night—and as far as I can remember in one singJe night—the 
lower God (Ariman) appeared. The radiant picture of his rays 
became visible to my inner eye (compare footnote 61), while I 
was lying in bed not sleeping but awake—that is to say he was 
reflected on my inner nervous system. Simultaneously I heard 
his voice; but it was not a soft whisper—as the talk of the 
voices always was before and after that time—it resounded in 
a mighty bass as if directly in front of my bedroom windows. 
The impression was intense, so that anybody not hardened 
to terrifying miraculous impressions as I was, would have been 
shaken to the core. Also what was spoken did not sound 
friendly by any means: everything seemed calculated to instill 
fright and terror into me and the word "wretch" was frequently 
heard—an expression quite common in the basic language to 
denote a human being destined to be destroyed by God and to 
feel God's power and wrath. Yet everything that was spoken 
was genuine, not phrases learnt by rote as they later were, but 
the immediate expression of true feeling.
   For this reason my impression was not one of alarm and fear, 
but largely one of admiration for the magnificent and the sub- 
lime; the effect on my nerves was therefore beneficial despite 
the insults contained in some of the words-, when the "tested"



MEMOIRS
souls which had for a time kept shyly in the background dared 
to appear again, I could not but express my feelings repeatedly 
in words such as "Oh how pure!"—towards the majesty of the 
divine rays—and "Oh how vulgar!"—towards the tested souls. 
Further, the divine rays read my thoughts correctly, without 
falsifying them, as has been done without exception since; 
they even gave them verbal expression in a rhythm correspon- 
ding to the natural movement of human nerves," so that de- 
spite all the frightening side effects, the total impression I 
received was a calming one and eventually I fell asleep.
   On the following day and perhaps on one or two more days 
(in fact in day-time while I was in the garden) I saw the upper 
God (Ormuzd), this time not with my mind's eye but with my 
bodily eye. It was the sun, although not the sun in her usual 
appearance as known to every human being, but surrounded by 
a silver sea of rays which covered a 6th or 8th part of the sky, 
as mentioned in footnote 19, Chapter 2. Figures of course do 
not matter very much; but to guard against any danger of exag- 
geration I concede that from my recollection it might as well 
have been only a 10th or the 12th part of the sky. However that 
may be, the sight was of such overwhelming splendor and 
magnificence that I did not dare look at it continually^ but 
tried to avert my gaze from the phenomenon. One of the many 
things incomprehensible to me is that other human beings 
should have existed at that time apart from myself, and that



Personal experiences at Sonnenstein . . .
the attendant M., who alone accompanied me at the time, re- 
mained apparently totally indifferent to this phenomenon. But 
his indifference did not really astonish me, because I consid- 
ered him a fleeting-improvised-man, who of course led a dream 
life and so could not be expected to have any understanding for 
those impressions which must inspire a thinking human being 
with the highest interest. But I am absolutely at a loss to make 
sense of the fact that such a phenomenal impression should 
have passed him by (if he was a real human being) and the 
many thousands of other people in other places who must have 
had the same impression at the time. Of course other people 
will be ready to counter with the slogan that I suffered from a 
mere "hallucination." But the certainty of my recollection 
makes this for me subjectively quite out of the question, the 
more so as the phenomenon was repeated on several consecu- 
tive days and lasted for several hours on each single day; nor do 
I believe that my memory fails me when I add that that more 
radiant sun spoke to me in the same way as the sun did before 
and still does without interruption.
   After a few days the miraculous phenomena of which I have 
spoken were over; the sun assumed the shape which she 
has since then retained without interruption;'^ the talk of the 
voices also turned again into a low whisper. I believe the rea- 
son for this change lies in the fact that at that time even God's 
omnipotence was induced to follow the example of Flechsig's 
soul and attempted "tying-to-celestial-bodies." If the influx of 
God's pure rays had lasted unhindered, as in the days described 
above and the nights following, I am certain that in a short



MEMOIRS
time my recovery would have had to follow, or perhaps even 
that I would have been unmanned and simultaneously impreg- 
nated. But as one wanted neither the one nor the other, but al- 
ways started from the mistaken notion that it would soon be 
possible to free oneself from the power of attraction of my 
nerves by "forsaking" me, tying-to-celestial-bodies was started 
to prevent pure rays reaching my body. How little this policy 
was permanently successful will be shown later.^^
   My outward life was extremely monotonous during that



Personal experiences at Sonnenstein . .
time—the first months of my stay at Sonnenstein. Apart from 
daily morning and afternoon walks in the garden, I mainly sat 
motionless the whole day on a chair at my table, did not even 
move towards the window, where by the way nothing was to 
be seen except green trees (compare above); even in the garden 
I preferred to remain seated always in the same spot, and was 
only occasionally urged by the attendants to walk about, really 
against my will. Naturally opportunities for occupation were 
almost completely lacking even had I had the inclination,- dur- 
ing that period everything was kept locked in both my rooms 
and the keys removed; I had access only to one single drawer 
containing a few brushes and similar things. I did not possess 
writing material; all my necessaries (articles of clothing, watch, 
purse, knife, scissors, etc.) were taken from me, there were only 
about 4 to 5 books in my room which I might have read had I 
been so inclined. All the same the main reason for my immobil- 
ity was not so much the actual lack of means of occupation but 
that I considered absolute passivity almost a religious duty.
   Although this idea did not originate spontaneously in me 
but was induced by the voices that talked to me, I kept it up 
myself for a time until I realized that it was purposeless. That 
rays could ever expect me to remain totally immobile ("not 
the slightest movement" was an often-repeated slogan), must 
again be connected I am convinced, with God not knowing 
how to treat a living human being, as He was accustomed to 
dealing only with corpses or at best with human beings lying 
asleep (dreaming). Thus arose the almost monstrous demand 
that I should behave continually as if I myself were a corpse, as 
also a number of other more or less absurd ideas, which were 
all contrary to human nature. Every noise created by miracle 
around me—and this recurs continually at short intervals, ei- 
ther by somebody speaking or making himself otherwise con- 
spicuous, by cracking of walls, creaking of floors, etc.—is in a 
peculiar confusion of terms called an "interference" annoying



MEMOIRS
to me. One falsely produces in me the phrase "if only the 
cursed interference would stop," which is reiterated innumer- 
able times every day, by producing vibrations in my nerves 
which correspond to these words; whereas in reality these 
noises are felt as frightening by the rays, since they produce 
the so-called "listening-in-thought." Further—in conditions in 
consonance with the Order of the World—it would never occur 
to a human being to consider the talk of his fellow men, for in- 
stance, as an unpleasant interference."
   I believe I can explain how the wholly absurd notion arose 
by recalling the usual phenomena which accompany nerve- 
contact made with a sleeping human being (in his dreams). 
Through such nerve-contact a temporary connection was ef- 
fected between divine rays and the nerves of that person; of 
course it was calculated to last only a short time, perhaps 
for the purpose of imparting information about matters con- 
cerning the beyond (compare Chapter 1), or to stimulate po- 
etic imagination, etc. To succumb permanently to the power 
of attraction of such nerves would endanger God Himself; 
therefore one had to attempt to get away again when the pur- 
pose was achieved; one only had to produce little noises by 
miracle (the so-called "interferences") through which the at- 
tention of the sleeping, perhaps just waking, human being 
was diverted, and this short period of diverted attention suf- 
ficed the rays in the case of nerves not as highly excited as 
mine, to give up the nerve-contact and enable them to with- 
draw from the person. No really serious danger could arise for 
God while it was easy for rays to withdraw, as from only mod-



Personal experiences at Sonnenstein . .
erately excited nerves. These circumstances were then taken as 
pertaining equally to me without making allowance that my 
relation to divine rays had long ago become indissoluble owing 
to the enormously increased power of attraction of my nerves.
   I considered the immobility demanded from me a duty in- 
cumbent on me both in the interests of self-preservation and of 
God, so as to liberate Him from the embarrassment in which 
He found Himself owing to the "tested souls." I had formed 
the opinion—probably not altogether unfounded—that more 
rays would be lost if I myself moved to and fro (equally when a 
draft went through the room); as I was then still filled with 
holy awe towards divine rays because of their high purposes, 
and being also uncertain as to whether eternity really existed 
or whether the store of rays might suddenly be exhausted, I 
considered it my task to prevent any squandering of rays as far 
as it was in my power. I had also formed the view, influenced 
by the opinions of the voices continually talking to me in this 
sense, that a drawing down of "tested souls," so that they 
should spend themselves totally in my body and thus allow 
the restoration of God's sole power in the sky, would be much 
facilitated if I kept my body immobile. I therefore made the 
almost incredible sacrifice of desisting from every movement 
and of course from every occupation for several weeks and 
months, the conversation of voices excepted; this went so far 
that not even at night did I dare change my position in bed, be- 
cause the spending of tested souls was to be expected mostly 
during sleep. I made this sacrifice, although I had already then 
received some taste of the "half and half" policy which God's 
omnipotence pursued towards me, but I could not get myself 
to believe that God harbored really evil intent towards me.
   No change in these conditions occurred until the end of 
1894 or early 1895. It coincided with another miraculous 
phenomenon, the "cursed cieation-of-a-false-feeling"¡ this was 
the name given to it by the voices who recognized the tort



MEMOIRS
intended by it. The constant endeavor of rays to withdraw 
from me (to "forsake" me) was checked only by the holiness of 
tny purpose which was bound to attract all pure souls or rays, 
and by my deep and sincere concern about my relation to God 
and my own situation in life. One started therefore to falsify 
my own frame of mind through miracles, in order to create 
the impression of a frivolous human being given only to the 
pleasures of the moment (to "represent" me as such, compare 
footnote 62). Such an influence by miracles on one's mood is 
possible as I have learned by experience, but I am unable to say 
more as to how it comes about; in order to give the reader an 
approximate idea I can only use a comparison, and point to the 
use of morphine which has the effect of producing a relatively 
serene, in any case indifferent mood, in a person who is ha- 
rassed by bodily pain or in the throes of a depression.
   At the beginning I resisted the influence of the "creation-of 
a-false-feeling" (the mood-falsifying-miracle); but as time went 
by I found it easier to allow its influence, because I noticed 
that subjectively I really felt less unhappy and because I had to 
admit, that with all holiness of mind and with all my self-sac- 
rificing endeavors to assist God in His fight against the "tested 
souls," I had not really achieved very much. I became more in- 
different to my own situation, remembered Horace's "Caipe 
diem," attempted to brush aside cares for the future, simply to 
live for the day and accept what life still had to offer. For in- 
stance this led me to resume smoking cigars at the turn of 
1894-95, which I had totally given up for years. On the other 
hand the rays did not achieve their purpose with the "creation- 
of-a-false-feeling." The power of attraction of my over-excited 
nerves remained undiminished in spite of the changed mood, 
the only difference being that I did not feel as unhappy as be- 
fore. Here also as in almost all miracles which aie contrary to 
the Order of the World, it seems the poet's word of the power 
"which always wills the evil and yet creates the good" applies.



..
   It goes almost without saying that my behavior as described 
above could not be correctly judged by my environment, least 
of all by my physicians and attendants, assuming always that 
they were then real human beings. As I had shown no interest 
in anything nor displayed any intellectual needs, they could 
hardly see in me anything but a stuporose dullard. And yet the 
real situation towered sky-high above this appearance: I lived 
in the belief—and it is still my conviction that this is the 
truth—that I had to solve one of the most intricate problems 
ever set for man and that I had to fight a sacred battle for the 
greatest good of mankind. Unfortunately my deceiving appear- 
ance to the contrary brought with it innumerable indignities 
in the way I was treated; for years I suffered from them se- 
verely, and it seemed that one had altogether forgotten my 
standing and the high official position I had occupied in life. 
The attendant M. repeatedly threw me back into the bath 
when I wanted to leave it after a time, or in the morning when 
it was time to get up and I wanted to, threw me back into bed 
for reasons unknown to me; or in day-time when I was about 
to doze sitting at the table, he wakened me out of my sleep by 
pulling my beard, or he combed my hair with a fine comb 
while I was in the bath—and this at a time when flights of rays 
plowed through my skull (compare the next chapter). At meal- 
times he used to tie a napkin round my neck as if I were a little 
child. Cigars were given me one at a time at certain hours of 
the day; only several years afterwards did I succeed in obtain- 
ing all the cigars for the day in the morning; later still a box of 
a hundred was put at my disposal as reserve. From another at- 
tendant I once had to suffer the indignity of having my ears 
boxed. Sometimes I opposed such indignities with actual re- 
sistance, particularly when one wanted to remove the wash- 
basin for the night from my bedroom, which was locked from 
the outside; or when one tried to move me from my own bed- 
room to sleep in the cells fitted out for raving madmen. Later



MEMOIRS
on I desisted from all opposition because it led to senseless 
scenes of violence; I kept silent and suffered.
   Naturally nothing is further from my mind than to wish to 
denounce the attendant M. or any other attendant to his supe- 
riors by relating the indignities I had to suffer. I condone the 
excesses which M. was guilty of in view of his low education; 
it is also true that in later years he served me satisfactorily on 
the whole, although he continued to give himself airs. But I 
could not avoid mentioning these little traits if I wanted to 
demonstrate the measure of ignominy which I had to endure 
for years and the deep wounding of my sense of honor which at 
all times was fully alive.
   In order to complete the picture of my situation during the 
early part of my stay at Sonnenstein it is necessary to give an 
account of the miracles which were enacted against me, and I 
will do this in the following chapter.




Bodily integrity damaged
by miracles
11
FROM THE FIRST beginnings of my contact with God up 
to the present day my body has continuously been the object of 
divine miracles. If I wanted to describe all these miracles in de- 
tail I could ñu a whole book with them alone. I may say that 
hardly a single limb or organ in my body escaped being tem- 
porarily damaged by miracles, nor a single muscle being pulled 
by miracles, either moving or paralyzing it according to the re- 
spective purpose. Even now the miracles which I experience 
hourly are still of a nature as to frighten every other human be- 
ing to death; only by getting used to them through the years 
have I been able to disregard most of what happens as triviali- 
ties. But in the first year of my stay at Sonnenstein the mira- 
cles were of such a threatening nature that I thought I had to 
fear almost incessantly for my life, my health or my reason.
   In itself a state of affairs must be considered contrary to the 
Order of the World in which the rays serve mainly to inflict 
damage on the body of a single human being or to play tricks 
with the objects with which he is occupied—such harmless 
miracles have become particularly frequent latterly. For rays
-|
141



M E M o J R
have the task of creating not just of destroying or playing 
childish pranks. Hence all miracles directed against me fail in 
the long run in their purpose; what has been destroyed or dam- 
aged by impure rays must alv^^ays later be built up or mended 
again by pure rays (compare above Chapter 7, footnote 48). But 
this does not exclude that temporaiily most serious damage is 
caused and very painful conditions arise giving the impression 
of extreme danger.
   Most nearly in consonance with the Order of the World were 
those miracles which were somehow connected with a process 
of iinmanning to be carried out on my body. To them belonged 
especially the various changes in my sex organ: several times 
(particularly in bed) there were marked indications of an actual 
retraction of the male organ,- frequently however, particularly 
when mainly impure rays were involved, of a softening ap- 
proaching almost complete dissolution; further the removal by 
miracles of single hairs from my beard and particularly my 
mustache-, finally à change in my whole stature (diminution of 
body size)—probably due to a contraction of the vertebrae and 
possibly of my thigh bones. The last-mentioned miracle which 
emanated from the lower God (Ariman), was always accompa- 
nied by him with the announcement "I wonder whether to 
make you somewhat smaller"; I myself had the impression 
that my body had become smaller by about 6-8 cms., that is to 
say approximating the size of the female body.
   The miracles enacted against the organs of the thoracic and 
abdominal cavities were very multifarious. I know least about 
those concerning the heart; I only remember that I once had a 
different heart*'—still during my stay in the University Clinic



Bodily integrity damaged . . .
of Leipzig. On the other hand my Jungs were for a long time 
the object of violent and very threatening attacks. By nature 
my lungs and chest are very healthy; but my lungs were so af- 
fected by miracles that for a time I seriously believed I had to 
fear a fatal outcome in consequence of pulmonary phthisis. 
A "lung worm" was frequently produced in me by miracles; I 
cannot say whether it was an animal-like being or a soul-like 
creature; I can only say that its appearance was connected with 
a biting pain in the lungs similar to the pains I imagine occur 
in inflammation of the lungs. The lobes of my lungs were at 
times almost completely absorbed, I cannot say whether as the 
result of the activity of the lung worm alone or also because of 
miracles of a different kind; I had the definite feeling that my 
diaphragm was raised high in my chest to almost directly un- 
der my larynx and that there remained only a small remnant of 
lung in between with which I could hardly breathe. There were 
days when during my walks in the garden I had to reconquer 
my lungs anew with every breath. For the part which is so 
miraculous is that the rays cannot but furnish a suffering body 
with whatever is most essential for its preservation, because to 
create is their essence and nature.
   At about the same time some of my ribs were sometimes 
temporarily smashed, always with the result that what had been 
destroyed was re-formed after a time. One of the most horrify- 
ing miracles was the so-called compression-of-the-chest-miracle, 
which I endured at least several dozen times; it consisted in 
the whole chest wall being compressed, so that the state of op- 
pression caused by the lack of breath was transmitted to my



MEMOIRS
whole body. The compression-of-the-chest-miracle recurred 
several times in later years,- but like the other miracles de- 
scribed here, it belongs mainly to the second half of the year 
1894 and perhaps the first half of the year 1895.
   Concerning the stomach: already during my stay in Flech- 
sig's Asylum the Viennese nerve specialist named in Chapter 5 
miraculously produced in place of my healthy natural stomach 
a very inferior so-called "Jew's stomach." Later for a time the 
miracles were in preference directed against my stomach, partly 
because the souls begrudged me the sensual pleasure con- 
nected with the taking of food, partly because they considered 
themselves superior to human beings who require earthly 
nourishments; they therefore tended to look down on all eat- 
ing and drinking with some disdain.*' I existed frequently 
without a stomach; I expressly told the attendant M., as he 
may remember, that I could not eat because I had no stomach. 
Sometimes immediately before meals a stomach was so to speak 
produced ad hoc by miracles. This was done particularly by 
von W.'s soul, which in at least some of its forms sometimes 
showed a friendly spirit towards me. Naturally this never 
lasted long; the stomach which had been produced by miracles, 
in any case only an inferior stomach, was usually removed 
again miraculously by v. W.'s soul during the meal "because of 
a change of mind"; great changeability is a marked feature of 
the soul-character, absolutely divine rays perhaps excluded. 
Food and drink taken simply poured into the abdominal cavity 
and into the thighs, a process which however unbelievable it 
may sound, was beyond all doubt for me as I distinctly remem- 
ber the sensation.
   In the case of any other human being this would have



Bodily integrity damaged . . .
resulted in natural pus formation with an inevitably fatal out- 
come; but the food pulp could not damage my body because 
all impure matter in it was soaked up again by the rays. Later, 
I therefore repeatedly went ahead with eating unperturbed, 
without having a stomach; all in all I gradually got used to re- 
garding everything which happened in my body with complete 
equanimity. Even now I am convinced that I am immune to 
all natural disease influences; disease germs only arise in me 
through rays and are removed again in the same way by rays. 
Indeed I doubt very much whether I am at all mortal as long 
as the communication with rays lasts; for instance, I think I 
could take the strongest poison without particular danger to 
my life and my health." After all what can poisons do but de- 
stroy some important organs or have a destructive effect on 
the blood? Both have happened to me innumerable times 
through rays without any permanent ill effect."
   Of other internal organs I will only mention the gullet and 
the intestines/^ which were torn or vanished repeatedly, fur- 
ther the pharynx, which I partly ate up several times, finally 
the seminal coid, against which very painful miracles were 
directed, with the particular purpose of suppressing the sen- 
sation of voluptuousness arising in my body. I must further



MEMOIRS
mention a miracle which affected my whole abdomen, the 
so-called putre/action of the abdomen. This miracle originated 
regularly from von W.'s soul in one of its most impure shapes— 
in contrast to other parts of von W.'s soul—hence the name 
"abdominal putrefaction of von W." It threw the putrid matter 
which caused the abdominal putrefaction into my belly with 
such ruthlessness, that more than once I believed I would have 
to rot alive, and the rotten smell escaped from my mouth in a 
most disgusting manner. Von W.'s soul assumed that the ab- 
dominal putrefaction would be removed again by God's rays; 
this happened through rays of a particular kind adapted to this 
purpose, which pushed their way into my intestines like a 
wedge and absorbed their putrid content. God's rays appeared 
to act from the instinctive knowledge that it would be most 
distasteful for them to have to allow themselves to be at- 
tracted by a rotting body. This notion was expressed repeatedly 
in the slogan, that if I were to be forsaken, I should be forsaken 
with "a pure body"; but naturally this notion too suffered from 
the usual obscurity, as apparently one was not at all clear how 
the nerves of a "forsaken" body would lose their power of at- 
traction. Those miracles always appeared most threatening to 
me which were in one way or another directed against my rea- 
son. These concerned firstly my head-, secondly during a cer- 
tain period—of probably several weeks round the autumn of 
1894—also the spinal cord, which next to the head was consid- 
ered as the seat of reason. One therefore attempted to pump 
the spinal cord out, which was done by so-called "little men" 
placed in my feet. Later I will have more to say about these 
"little men," which have some similarity to the phenomenon 
of the same name which I discussed in Chapter 6; as a rule 
there were two of them, a little Flechsig and a little von 
W., whose voices I could also hear in my feet. The effect of 
the pumping out was that the spinal cord left my mouth in 
considerable quantity in the form of little clouds, particularly



Bodily integrity damaged . . .
when I was walking in the garden. One can imagine the appre- 
hension with which such events filled me, as I did not then 
know whether or not any part of my reason would thus in fact 
vanish into the air. The miracles directed against my head and 
the nerves of my head happened in manifold ways. One at- 
tempted to pull the nerves out of my head, for a time even 
(during the nights) to transplant them into the head of M. who 
slept in the next room. These attempts caused ¡besides the fear 
of an actual loss of my nerves) an unpleasant tension in my head. 
However the pulling out succeeded only moderately, the stay- 
ing power of my nerves proved the greater force and the half- 
pulled-out nerves always returned to my head after a short 
time. Serious devastation was caused in my head by the so- 
called "flights of rays, " a phenomenon difficult to describe, the 
effect of which was that my skull was repeatedly sawn asunder 
in various directions. I frequently had—and still have regularly 
daily—the sensation that my whole skull had temporarily 
thinned; in my opinion this was brought about through the 
bony material of my skull being partly pulverized by the de- 
structive action of the rays; but it is restored again by pure rays 
particularly during sleep. One can form some picture of the 
disagreeable sensations these happenings cause if one consid- 
ers that these are the rays of a whole world—somehow mechan- 
ically fastened at their point of issue—which travel around one 
single head and attempt to tear it asunder and pull it apart in a 
fashion comparable to quartering.
   Further, in the time I am discussing attempts were repeat- 
edly made to cover my nerves with some noxious matter; it ap- 
peared as if the natural capacity of nerves to vibrate were 
thereby really impaired, so that even I myself had at times the 
impression of becoming temporarily stupid. One of the agents 
concerned was called "poison of intoxication"; I cannot say 
what its chemical nature was. From time to time also the liq- 
uids of the food I had taken were by miracle placed on the



MEMOIRS
nerves of my head, so that these were covered with a sort of 
paste, and the capacity to think temporarily impaired; I re- 
member distinctly that this happened once with coffee.
   All my muscies were (and still are) the object of miracles for 
the purpose of preventing all movements and every occupation 
I am about to undertake. For instance attempts are made to 
paralyze my fingers when I play the piano or write, and to 
cause some damage to my knee-cap to make marching im.pos- 
sible when I walk about in the garden or in the corridor. Lately 
the effect has mostly been only to make such occupations dif- 
ficult or cause only moderate pain on walking.
   My eyes and the muscles of the lids which serve to open 
and close them were an almost uninterrupted target for mira- 
cles. The eyes were always of particular importance, because 
rays lose the destructive power with which they are equipped 
after a relatively short time as soon as they see something, and 
then enter my body without causing damage. The object seen 
can be either visual (eye) impressions, which are communi- 
cated to the rays when my eyes are open, or images which I 
can cause at will on my inner nervous system by imagination, 
so that they become visible to the rays. I shall return to these 
events, which in the soul-language are called the "picturing" 
of human beings, in another context. Here I will only mention 
that attempts were made early on and kept up throughout the 
past years, to close my eyes against my will, so as to rob me of 
visual impressions and thus preserve the rays' destructive 
power. This phenomenon can be observed on me at almost 
every moment; whoever watches carefully will observe that 
my eyelids suddenly droop or close even while I am talking to 
other people; this never occurs in human beings under natural 
conditions. In order to keep my eyes open nevertheless, a great 
effort of will is needed; but as I am not always particularly in- 
terested in keeping my eyes open I allow them to be closed 
temporarily at times.



Bodily integrity damaged . . .
   During my first months here the miracles on my eyes were 
performed by "little men," very similar to those I mentioned 
when describing the miracle directed against my spinal cord. 
These "little men" were one of the most remarkable and even 
to me most mysterious phenomena; but I have no doubt what- 
ever in the objective reality of these happenings, as I saw these 
"little men" innumerable times with my mind's eye" and heard 
their voices. The remarkable thing about it was that souls or 
their single nerves could in certain conditions and for particu- 
lar purposes assume the form of tiny human shapes (as men- 
tioned earlier only of a few millimeters in size|, and as such 
made mischief on all parts of my body, both inside and on 
the surface. Those occupied with the opening and closing 
of the eyes stood above the eyes in the eyebrows and there 
pulled the eyelids up or down as they pleased with fine fil- 
aments like cobwebs. Here too those concerned were usually 
a "little Flechsig" and a "little v. W." and sometimes in addi- 
tion another "little man," who had originated from Daniel 
Fürchtegott Flechsig's soul which still existed at that time. 
Whenever I showed signs of being unwilling to allow my eye- 
lids to be pulled up and down and actually opposed it, the "lit- 
tle men" became annoyed and expressed this by calling me 
"wretch"; if I wiped them off my eyes with a sponge, it was 
considered by the rays as a sort of crime against God's gift of 
miracles. By the way, wiping them away had only a very 
temporary effect, because the "little men" were each time set 
down afresh. Other "little men" were assembled almost 
continuously on my head in great number. They were called 
"little devils." They literally walked around on my head.
r n
149



MEMOIRS
curiously nosing about to see v^hether any new destruction 
had been caused on my head by miracles. In a way they even 
partook of my meals, helping themselves to a part, though nat- 
urally only a tiny part, of the food I ate; it made them appear 
temporarily somewhat swollen, but also less active and less de- 
structive in their intentions. Some of the "little devils" partici- 
pated in a miracle which was often enacted against my head and 
of which I will now say a little more. This was perhaps the 
most abominable of all miracles—next to the compression-of- 
the-chest-miracle; the expression used for it if I remember cor- 
rectly was "the head-compressing-machine." In consequence of 
the many flights of rays, etc., there had appeared in my skull a 
deep cleft or rent roughly along the middle, which probably was 
not visible from outside but was from inside. The "little dev- 
ils" stood on both sides of this cleft and compressed my head 
as though in a vice by turning a kind of screw, causing my head 
temporarily to assume an elongated almost pear-shaped form. 
It had an extremely threatening effect, particularly as it was 
accompanied by severe pain. The screws were loosened tem- 
porarily but only very gradually, so that the compressed state 
usually continued for some time. The "little devils" responsi- 
ble mostly derived from v. W.'s soul. These "little men" and 
"little devils" disappeared after a few months never to appear 
again. The moment of their departure coincided approximately 
with the appearance of the posterior realms of God. It is true 
that miracles are still responsible for opening and closing my 
eyelids in the manner described, but for almost six years now 
it has no longer been done by the "little men" but directly by 
rays which set the muscles concerned in motion. In order to 
prevent my closing or opening my eyes at will the thin layer of 
muscle situated in and above the eyelids and serving their 
movement has several times been removed by miracle. But 
again the effect was only temporary: the muscle tissue so lost 
was always restored again—for reasons often mentioned before.



Bodily integrity damaged . . .
   Manifold miracles were also directed against my skeleton, 
apart from those against my ribs and skull mentioned earlier. 
In the foot bones particularly in the region of the heel, caries 
was often caused by miracle, causing me considerable pain,- 
luckily, however, the severest pains did not last long. A similar 
miracle was the so-called coccyx miracle. This was an extremely 
painful, caries-like state of the lowest vertebrae. Its purpose 
was to make sitting and even lying down impossible. Alto- 
gether I was not allowed to remain for long in one and the same 
position or at the same occupation: when I was walking one at- 
tempted to force me to lie down, and when I was lying down 
one wanted to chase me off my bed. Rays did not seem to ap- 
preciate at all that a human being who actually exists must be 
somewhere. Because of the irresistible attraction of my nerves 
I had become an embarrassing human being for the rays (for 
God), in whatever position or circumstance I might be or what- 
ever occupation I undertook. One did not want to admit that 
what had happened was not my fault, but one always tended to 
reverse the blame by way of "representing." "
   I believe I have given an almost complete description in 
this chapter of those miracles which I was led to consider the 
essential ones, because of their threatening character. In the 
course of this essay I will frequently have to mention many 
other miracles of a less dangerous kind (partly on my body, 
partly on the objects around me); some of them had already ap- 
peared side by side with the miracles described above, some 
only started later.



Content of the voices' talk. 
"Soul-conception."
Soul-language. Continuation 
of personal experiences
12
AS MENTIONED IN Chapter 9 the talk of the voices had 
already become mostly an empty babel of ever-recurring mo- 
notonous phrases in tiresome repetition; on top of this they 
were rendered grammatically incomplete by the omission of 
words and even syllables. However, the description of a certain 
number of phrases used is of interest, because of the sidelight 
thrown on the souls' whole way of thinking, their idea of hu- 
man life and of human thinking. Among these phrases are 
those in which I was called a "Prince of Hell"—roughly since 
the time of my stay in Pierson's Asylum. It was said innumer- 
able times for instance, that "God's omnipotence has decided, 
that the Prince of Hell is going to be burned alive," "The 
Prince of Hell is responsible for the loss of rays," "We an- 
nounce victory over the beaten Prince of Hell," but then again 
by some of the voices: "Not Schreber, but Flechsig is the true 
'Prince of Hell,' " etc.
   Anybody who knew me in my former life and had the op- 
portunity of observing my cool and sober nature, will readily



Content of the voices' talk . . .
believe that I myself could never have ventured on so fantastic a 
term as that of "Prince of Hell," still less as it was in such queer 
contrast to the poverty of my outward life situation, to the many 
limitations of freedom to which I was subjected, etc. There was 
certainly nothing in the appearance of my surroundings which 
was remindful of either Hell or of a princely setting. In my 
opinion the expression "Prince of Hell," which was only erro- 
neously applied to me, was originally based on an abstraction.
   The realms of God may always have known that the Order 
of the World however great and magnificent, was yet not with- 
out its Achilles' heel, inasmuch as the human nerves' power of 
attracting God's nerves constituted some danger for the realms 
of God. These dangers were likely to become more acute when 
somewhere on earth or on any other star nervousness or moral 
depravity gained the upper hand. In order to form a clearer pic- 
ture of these dangers the souls had apparently adopted a kind 
of personification, similar to the way in which nations in their 
infancy try to understand the idea of God better by means of 
graven images of false gods. The phrase "Prince of Hell" was 
probably meant to convey the uncanny power inimical to God 
that could develop from moral decay among mankind or a 
general spread of nervous over-excitement in consequence of 
over-civilization. As my nerves' power of attraction became 
more and more irresistible, the "Prince of Hell" appeared 
suddenly to have become reality in my person. An enemy was 
therefore seen in me who had to be destroyed by all the might 
of divine power; one refused to recognize that on the contrary 
I was the best friend to pure rays from whom alone I could 
expect my recovery or other satisfactory solution of the conflict. 
One was apparently more inclined to share one s own power 
with impure ( tested souls)—God s real enemies—than to put 
up with the idea of being dependent on a single human being 
whom one would otherwise have looked down upon in the 
proud awareness of distant power.



MEMOIRS
   Phrases of another group having certain factual significance 
were those in which one talked of the "soul-conception." Fun- 
damentally this contained significant and valuable ideas. In 
its original meaning soul-conception is I think a somewhat 
idealized version which souls had formed of human life and 
thought. One must remember that souls were the departed 
spirits of erstwhile human beings. As such they had a lively 
interest not only in their own human past but also in the 
fortunes of their still-living relatives and friends and in every- 
thing that happened to mankind; they could gain such knowl- 
edge either through nerve-contact or outward impressions by 
actually seeing (compare Chapter 1). They were able to express 
in more or less distinct words some rules of conduct and atti- 
tude to life. I will quote a few of these sentences as examples. 
"Do not think about certain parts of your body" was a rule of 
conduct apparently expressing the idea that man in his normal 
healthy state has no reason to think of particular parts of his 
body, unless reminded of them by pain. "Not at the first de- 
mand," was another phrase, indicating that a sensible human 
being would not allow himself to be led into one or other ac- 
tion by a momentary impulse. "A job started must be fin- 
ished" was the formula expressing that man should pursue to 
its ultimate goal what he starts, without being distracted by 
adverse influences, etc.
   In man's thought processes one distinguished the "thought 
of decision"—man's exertion of will to do a certain thing— 
"wishful thoughts," "thoughts of hope" and "thoughts of 
fear." The "thinking-it-over-thought" denoted something 
perhaps also known to psychologists; it often leads a person 
to turn his will power in the opposite direction or at least 
change it from that which at first he may have felt inclined to 
follow, but which on further consideration automatically 
causes doubts. "The human thought-of-recollection" was used 
to indicate man's automatic need to imprint on his mind by



Content of the voices' talk . . .
repetition an important thought which had occurred to him. 
How deeply ingrained the "human thought-of-recollection" is 
in the nature of the human processes of thought and feeling, 
can be seen from very characteristic instances when in poems 
rhymes (refrains) recur, or when in musical compositions a cer- 
tain sequence of notes expressing the embodiment of beauty 
occurs not only once but is repeated again and again. A very 
prominent part was played in the "soul-conception" by ideas 
about the relation between the two sexes and their respective 
mode of occupation, their tastes, etc. For instance beds, hand- 
mirrors and rakes were considered feminine, basket-chairs and 
spades masculine; of games, chess as masculine, checkers as 
feminine, etc.
   Souls knew very well that a man lies on his side in bed, a 
woman on her back (as the "succumbing part," considered 
from the point of view of sexual intercourse). I myself, who in 
earlier life never gave it a thought, have only learned this from 
the souls. From what I read in ior instance my father's MED- 
ICAL INDOOR GYMNASTICS (23rd Edition, p. 102), physi- 
cians themselves do not seem to be informed about it. Further, 
the souls knew that male voluptuousness is stimulated by the 
sight of female nudes, but on the contrary female voluptuous- 
ness to a very much lesser extent if at all by the sight of male 
nudes, while female nudes stimulate both sexes equally. For 
instance the sight of a nude male body perhaps at a swimming 
exhibition, will leave the female public cold (for this reason 
their admission is rightly not considered immoral to the same 
extent as the presence of men at a female swimming exhibi- 
tion), whereas a ballet will produce some sexual stimulation in 
both sexes. I do not know whether these phenomena are gener- 
ally known and considered correct. My own observations and 
the behavior of my own nerves of voluptuousness leave me in 
no doubt that the soul-conception is correct in this respect. I 
am of course fully aware that the reaction of my own (female)



MEMOIRS
nerves of voluptuousness does not in itself constitute proof for 
the very reason that it is exceptional for female nerves to be 
present in a male body as in my case.
   A distinction between masculine and feminine with re- 
spect to articles of clothing (the "armamentarium" as it was 
called in the basic language) is almost self-evident; boots ap- 
peared to the souls an especial symbol characteristic of man- 
liness. To the souls "to take off boots" meant much the same 
as unmanning.
   These short remarks may suffice to give an approximate idea 
of the original meaning of the expression "soul-conception." 
What I know about it I owe partly to definite information— 
during the early part of my illness—and partly to impressions 
received in my contact with souls. I have thus gained insight 
into the nature of human thought processes and human feel- 
ings for which many a psychologist might envy me.
   The phrases about "soul-conception" received a quite differ- 
ent meaning later. They degenerated into mere flourishes with 
which one tried to satisfy the need for speech, while totally 
lacking in own thoughts (compare Chapter 9|. "Do not forget 
that you are bound to the soul-conception" and "Now then, 
that is too much according to the soul-conception," became 
constantly recurring empty phrases, by the endless repetition 
of which I was tortured for years almost beyond endurance and 
still am. The latter phrase especially was the souls' almost con- 
stant retort when they could not think of what to say further to 
a new thought of mine, and it also shows by its poor stylistic 
form the degeneracy which had set in. In contrast the genuine 
basic language, that is the expression of the souls' true feelings 
before the time the mechanically repeated phrases com- 
menced, excelled in form also by its dignity and simplicity.
   Certain other phrases with quite important meanings can 
only be mentioned in the next chapter because of their context.
   My outward living conditions have in some respects at



Content of the voices' talk . . .
least become more bearable since about the first half of the 
year 1895, as mentioned at the end of Chapter 10. Most impor- 
tant was that I started to occupy myself in different ways. It is 
true I still declined to write to my relatives, in particular to my 
wife, although the attendant M. tried to persuade me. I did not 
then believe in the existence of a real mankind outside the 
Asylum, but thought that all the human shapes I saw, in par- 
ticular my wife when she visited me, were "fleeting and im- 
provised" for only a limited time, so that to write letters as 
was suggested to me would have been a sheer farce in which I 
was not prepared to take part. Since then however there have 
been opportunities to play chess (with other patients or with 
attendants) and to play the piano. Having once or twice played 
the piano in the common-room or library of the Asylum dur- 
ing my wife's visits, a small piano was put into my room in the 
spring of 1895 for my regular use. The feelings aroused in me 
when I resumed this occupation which in days of health I had 
enjoyed, I can best describe with a quotation from Tannhäuser:
"Total forgetting descended between today and yester- 
day. All my memories vanished rapidly and I could only 
remember that I had lost all hope of ever greeting you 
again or ever raising my eyes to you."
   The only time I played the piano in Flechsig's Asylum 
was on my wife's urgent persuasion; it was the aria from 
Handel's Messiah "I know that my Redeemer Liveth" from 
a score which happened to be at hand. My state was such that 
I played in the certain conviction of it being the last time in 
my life that my fingers would touch the keys of a piano. 
Having resumed chess and piano-playing in the Asylum, they 
became my two main occupations during the whole five years 
which have since passed. Playing the piano in particular was 
and still is of immense value to me,- I must confess that I find



MEMOIRS
it difficult to imagine how I could have borne the compulsive 
thinking and all that goes with it during these five years had I 
not been able to play the piano. During piano-playing the non- 
sensical twaddle of the voices which talk to me is drowned.'" 
Next to physical exercises it is one of the most efficient forms 
of the so-called not-thinking-of-anything-thought; but again 
one wanted to deprive me of it by introducing the "musical- 
not-thinking-of-anything-thought" as it was called in the soul- 
language. The rays always at least have a visual impression 
from my hands and from my reading the score, and every at- 
tempt at "representing" me by the "creation-of-a-false-feeling" 
and suchlike is doomed to end in failure because of the real 
feeling one can put into piano-playing. Piano-playing therefore 
was and still is one of the main objects of curses.
   The difficulties which were put in my way defy description. 
My fingers are paralyzed, the direction of my gaze is changed 
in order to prevent my finding the correct keys, my fingers are 
diverted on to wrong keys, the tempo is quickened by making 
the muscles of my fingers move prematurely; all these were 
and still are daily occurrences. Even the piano itself was fre- 
quently the object of miracles and strings were broken (luckily 
much more rarely in recent years). In 1897 alone the bill for 
broken piano strings amounted to no less than 86 marks.
   This is one of the few instances which I believe furnishes 
sufficient proof to convince other people of the reality of the 
miracles which I maintain happen. Superficial judgment might 
lead some to assume that I myself have caused the piano 
strings to snap by senseless banging on the piano; this was for 
instance my wife's repeatedly stated opinion, possibly having 
heard it from the physicians. In reply I maintain—and I am



Content of the voices' talk . . .
convinced that every expert will support me in this—that it is 
altogether impossible to snap the strings of a piano merely by 
banging on the keys, however violently. The small hammers 
linked with the keys only lightly touch the strings, and could 
never strike them sufficiently hard to break them. Let anyone 
try to hit the keys as hard as he likes, even with a hammer or 
a log of wood; the keyboard may perhaps be broken to pieces 
but he will never be able to break a string. Strings have 
broken much less frequently in recent years—it still happens 
occasionally—because the rays' (God's) intent towards me 
has become less unfriendly (more about this later) owing to 
my constantly increasing soul-voluptuousness; the rays were 
also forced by still more unpleasant conditions (even for them) 
in particular by the so-called "bellowing," to consider piano- 
playing the most congenial pastime for all concerned.
   I must mention another miraculous event in this connec- 
tion, although it really belongs to an earlier time, which is one 
of the most mysterious things even I ever experienced who, af- 
ter all, has seen so much of miraculous things. I remember 
that on a certain day while I still kept immobile (that is in the 
summer or autumn of 1894) the attempt was made on one oc- 
casion to place a whole grand piano (Bliithner) in my room by 
miracle; it seems to have been one of v. W.'s miracles. I am 
fully aware how absurd this sounds and I must therefore ask 
myself whether it could not have been a hallucination. But cer- 
tain circumstances make it extremely difficult for me to think 
so. I remember clearly that it took place in broad daylight 
while I was sitting in a chair or on the sofa; in front of me I dis- 
tinctly saw the polished brown surface of a grand piano in the 
making (hardly a few paces away). Unfortunately I disregarded 
the miracle at the time; I wanted nothing whatever to do with 
any kind of miracle; they all filled me with disgust, particu- 
larly as I had made absolute passivity my duty. Later I some- 
times regretted that I did not encourage the miracle ("pacify



MEMOIRS
it" was the expression in the basic language) to find out whether 
it could really be completed. Almost without exception all 
miracles were and are doomed to failure or rendered much 
more difficult if I oppose them resolutely with my will. And so 
I must leave undecided what objective background the re- 
ported event had: if it really was a hallucination it must have 
been of a most extraordinary kind in view of the immediate 
proximity of the object supposedly seen.
   Miracles of heat and cold were and still are daily enacted 
against me during walks in the garden and when I am indoors, 
always with the purpose of preventing the natural feeling of 
bodily well-being which is caused by the soul-voluptuousness; 
for instance miracles make my feet cold and my face hot. I 
think the physiological mechanism is that during the cold- 
miracle the blood is forced out of the extremities, so causing 
a subjective feeling of cold, and that conversely during the 
heat-miracle the blood is forced towards my face and head, in 
which of course coolness is the condition corresponding to a 
general sense of well-being. From youth accustomed to endur- 
ing both heat and cold, these miracles troubled me little, ex- 
cept when miracles made my feet cold while lying in bed, as 
happened often. Conversely I myself have often been forced to 
seek heat and cold. This was particularly necessary during the 
first years of my stay here, when soul-voluptuousness had not 
yet reached its present degree, in order to divert the rays to- 
wards the chilly parts particularly to the hands and feet, and so 
protect the head from the injurious influences intended. I fre- 
quently clung to the icy trees with my hands for many min- 
utes during the winter or held balls of snow until my hands 
were almost paralyzed. For some time (probably in the spring 
or autumn of 1895) I put my feet through the iron bars of the 
open window at night in order to expose them to the cold rain. 
As long as I did this the rays could not reach my head, which of 
course was of foremost importance to me, and I felt therefore



Content of the voices' talk . . .
perfectly well apart from frozen feet." I haye reason to assume 
that this behayior of mine somehow came to the notice of my 
physicians and caused them to adopt a measure which pro- 
yoked my severest displeasure. For a few days I was moved 
from my usual rooms and on my return I found that heavy 
wooden shutters had been fixed before my bedroom window, 
which were locked at night so that my bedroom was in total 
darkness and even the first light of day in the morning could 
hardly penetrate. Naturally the physicians probably had no 
idea of how deeply this measure affected me in my extremely 
hard struggle in defending myself against the attempts directed 
at destroying my reason. But it is understandable that it filled 
me with a deep and long-lasting sense of bitterness. Light, nec- 
essary for every human occupation, had become almost more 
essential for me than my daily bread in my allotted task of at 
all times convincing God, Who does not know the living hu- 
man being, of my undiminished powers of reason. Therefore 
depriving me of artificial light and prolonging the time of natu- 
ral darkness made my position immeasurably more difficult. I 
will not dispute with the physicians whether the measure they 
imposed was necessary from a purely human point of view to 
protect my health from the consequences of harmful actions. 
But here too I cannot help remarking that the means did not 
seem to fit the end. What could possibly have happened to me 
other than contracting a cold? The iron bars gave sufficient 
protection against the danger of falling out of the window, and 
as regards the danger of contracting a cold, one might well 
have waited to see whether human beings' natural need for 
warmth would not have prevented me from keeping the



MEMOIRS
windows open too long. But these neither were nor are the de- 
cisive factors. For me the main point was that I could only see 
the physicians as tools in whose nerves decisions were aroused 
by divine rays aimed at furthering the plans directed at de- 
stroying my reason; naturally without the physicians them- 
selves becoming subjectively conscious of this but thinking 
that they were acting simply from human deliberations. I must 
still maintain this opinion because behind every word which 
the physicians and other people speak to me I notice the divine 
influence as revealed to me by the writing-down-material I 
know so well, which I will perhaps try to explain further later 
on. In writing these lines I do not mean to recriminate about 
the past. I harbor no ill-will against any human being for what 
happened in times gone by; happily it has mostly been over- 
come. But I thought it necessary to discuss the affair about the 
window shutters in greater detail to explain the deep mistrust 
of the physicians which filled me for years, and of which they 
possibly noticed some signs in my behavior.
   These shutters (the only ones in the whole wing of the 
Asylum I inhabited) still exist, but have not been closed for a 
long time. Usually such shutters are found only in the cells 
equipped for raving madmen on the ground floor and first floor 
of the round wing of the Asylum. For two years (1896-1898) I 
slept in several of these cells as I will relate later, in which 
time the adverseness of my circumstances was if possible in- 
creased by the darkness.



The soul's state ot Blessedness 
as a factoi in attiaction.
Consequences thereof
13
THE MONTH OF November 1895 marks an important time 
in the history of my life and in particular in my own ideas of the 
possible shaping of my future. I remember the period distinctly; 
it coincided with a number of beautiful autumn days when there 
was a heavy morning mist on the Elbe. During that time the 
signs of a transformation into a woman became so marked on 
my body, that I could no longer ignore the imminent goal at 
which the whole development was aiming. In the immediately 
preceding nights my male sexual organ might actually have been 
retracted had I not resolutely set my will against it, still follow- 
ing the stirring of my sense of manly honor,- so near completion 
was the miracle. Soul-voluptuousness had become so strong 
that I myself received the impression of a female body, first on 
my arms and hands, later on my legs, bosom, buttocks and other 
parts of my body. I will discuss details in the next chapter.
   Several days' observations of these events sufficed to change 
the direction of my will completely. Until then I still consid- 
ered it possible that, should my life not have fallen victim to



MEMOIRS
one of the innumerable menacing miracles before, it would 
eventually be necessary for me to end it by suicide; apart from 
suicide the only possibility appeared to be some other horrible 
end for me, of a kind unknown among human beings. But now 
I could see beyond doubt that the Order of the World imperi- 
ously demanded my unmanning, whether I personally liked it 
or not, and that therefore it was common sense that nothing 
was left to me but reconcile myself to the thought of being 
transformed into a woman. Nothing of course could be envis- 
aged as a further consequence of unmanning but fertilization 
by divine rays for the purpose of creating new human beings. 
My change of will was facilitated by my not believing at that 
time that apart from myself a real mankind existed; on the 
contrary I thought all the human shapes I saw were only "fleet- 
ing and improvised," so that there could be no question of any 
ignominy being attached to unmanning. It is true however that 
those rays which were intent on "forsaking" me and which for 
that purpose wanted to destroy my reason, did not fail to make 
a hypocritical appeal to my sense of manly honor; some of the 
phrases, since repeated innumerable times whenever soul- 
voluptuousness appeared, were; "Are you not ashamed in front 
of your wife?," or still more vulgarly: "Fancy a person who was 
a Senatspräsident allowing himself to be f   d." But however 
repellent these voices, however often I had occasion to air my 
just indignation in one way or another during the thousand- 
fold repetition of these phrases, I did not allow myself to be di- 
verted from that behavior which I had come to recognize as 
essential and curative for all parties—myself and the rays.
   Since then I have wholeheartedly inscribed the cultivation 
of femininity on my banner, and I will continue to do so as far 
as consideration of my environment allows, whatever other 
people who are ignorant of the supernatural reasons may think 
of me. I would like to meet the man who, faced with the choice 
of either becoming a demented human being in male habitus



The soul's state of Blessedness . . .
or a spirited woman, would not prefer the latter. Such and only 
such is the issue for me. The pursuit of my previous profession, 
which I loved wholeheartedly, every other aim of manly ambi- 
tion, and every other use of my intellectual powers in the service 
of mankind, are now all closed to me through the way circum- 
stances have developed; even communication with my wife and 
relatives is denied me apart from occasional visits or exchange 
of letters.'™ I must follow a healthy egoism, unperturbed by the 
judgment of other people, which prescribes for me the cultiva- 
tion of femininity in a manner to be described more fully later. 
In this way only am I able to make my physical condition bear- 
able during the day and at night—at least in some measure— 
and obtain the sleep necessary for the recuperation of my nerves; 
high-grade voluptuousness eventually passes into sleep—maybe 
this is even known to medical science. Conducting myself in 
this manner I serve at the same time the express interest of the 
rays, that is God Himself. If I allow God, Who seems to be led by 
the erroneous assumption that my reason can be destroyed and 
Who at present pursues aims which are contrary to the Order 
of the World, to carry on His contrary policy all the time, it 
only leads to senseless noise in my environment, consisting 
mostly of madmen, as the experience of years has proved ir- 
refutably. Only later will I be able to say more about this."




MEMOIRS
   At the time when my whole attitude to things changed in 
the manner just described, an essential change also occuixed 
in celestial conditions—and for the very same reasons. The 
dissolution in my body of the rays (which are separated from 
the totality of God's nerves) due to my power of attraction 
amounts to the end of their independent existence, like death 
is to man. It was therefore a matter of course that God should 
make all attempts to avoid the fate of having to perish in my 
body with more and more parts of His totality, and indeed one 
was not very particular in choosing the means of prevention. 
But the attraction lost all its terror for these nerves, if and to 
the extent they met a feeling of soul-voluptuousness in my 
body in which they also participated. They then regained in 
my body a more or less adequate substitute for the lost heav- 
enly Blessedness which itself consisted in enjoyment similar 
to voluptuousness (compare Chapter 1).
   The feeling of soul-voluptuousness however, was not al- 
ways present in my body to the same extent; it reached its full 
development only when the parts of Flechsig's soul and the 
other "tested" soul parts lay in front and thus all rays were 
united. However there were also alternate periods in which 
soul-voluptuousness was either absent or present to a much 
lesser extent, because the tying-to-celestial-bodies (compare 
Chapter 9) forced the tested souls to draw back from time 
to time. This caused a certain periodicity in the appearance 
of female characteristics on my body of which I will have more 
to say later. But after the influx of God's rays had been constant 
for over a year—in November 1895—soul-voluptuousness be- 
came so great at times that some rays started to like enter- 
ing my body. This was noticeable first with the lower God 
(Ariman)—to some extent identical with the sun (see Chapter 
7), who being nearer partook in soul-voluptuousness much 
more than the upper God (Ormuzd) who remained at a far 
greater distance.



The soul's state of Blessedness . .
   Up to the change which took place in November 1895, only 
the lower God (Ariman) seemed to have a more intimate 
relationship with Flechsig—perhaps as a human being, perhaps 
as a "tested soul"—so that this plot, provided it existed as 
described in Chapter 2, did not reach higher than to involve 
the lower God (Ariman). Up to that time the upper God 
maintained a more correct, and on the whole more friendly 
attitude in consonance with the Order of the World towards 
me. Now this relationship was reversed. The lower God (Ari- 
man) as stated, did not object to losing himself with part of 
his nerves in my body, because he almost always met soul- 
voluptuousness there; he severed the close relations which 
apparently had existed between him and Fleshsig's "tested" 
soul; the latter at that time still possessed of a good deal of its 
human intelligence, now formed a sort of hostile alliance 
against me with the upper God. This change in the relation of 
the parties has persisted mostly unchanged to this day.
   The lower God's behavior towards me has since been gener- 
ally friendly, that of the upper God much more hostile. This 
was shown partly in the nature of their miracles—in the course 
of time the miracles of the lower God became more like the 
relatively harmless tricks mentioned in Chapter 2—partly in 
the talk of their respective voices. The voices emanating from 
the lower God—although also no longer the genuine expres- 
sion of direct momentary feeling, but rather an admixture of 
phrases learnt by rote—still differ considerably in form and 
content from those of the upper God. At least their content is 
not only abusive and full of insulting phrases, but amounts to 
a kind of neutral nonsense (for instance "David and Solomon," 
"salad and radishes," "little heaps of flour," etc., are repeated 
again and again). In their form also they are less of a nuisance 
to me because they fît in better with the natural right of man 
to think nothing. In time one grows accustomed to letting 
such nonsensical phrases as those mentioned in parentheses



MEMOIRS
pass through one's mind as forms of the "not-thinking-of-any- 
thing-thought." But the lower God, at least during the first 
years after the change described in this chapter, had at his dis- 
posal also a certain number of phrases which were of actual 
significance and which showed a quite correct (that is the 
same as my own) notion of the causes of the conflict, the 
means of its solution and probable future developments. But as 
said before, these were not genuine expressions of momentary 
feeling, but predetermined concoctions of thoughts spoken 
into my head by senseless voices in tiresome, monotonous rep- 
etition (later on mostly by miraculously produced birds). But 
these phrases were of great interest to me as they permitted 
me to see that God after all, was not so devoid of all under- 
standing for the necessities arising from the Order of the World 
as other observations made Him appear. I will therefore record 
some of these phrases.
   In the first place the change in the grouping of the parties 
which had occurred in consequence of the increase of soul- 
voluptuousness was signalized by the often-repeated phrase 
"Two parties have formed." Then there were various ways of 
expressing the thought that the whole policy God was pursu- 
ing against me aimed at destroying my reason had failed. Some 
phrases were of a general nature without any personal implica- 
tion, as for instance: "Knowledge and capabilities can in any 
case never be lost" and "Sleep must come"; further: "All non- 
sense (that is, the nonsense of thought reading and falsifying 
thoughts) cancels itself out," and "Permanent successes are on 
the side of the human being." Other phrases of the lower God 
were in part addressed to me personally, in part—spoken 
through my head as it were—to his colleague, the upper God; 
the former particularly in the already mentioned phrase: 
"Don't forget that you are tied to the soul-conception, " the lat- 
ter in phrases such as for instance: "Don't forget that all repre- 
senting is nonsense," or "Don't forget that the end of the world



The soul's state of Blessedness . . .
is a contradiction in itself," or "Well, since you have made the 
weather dependent on one human being's thoughts," or "Well, 
you have made any holy occupation impossible (for instance 
playing the piano or playing chess, through the manifold inter- 
fering miracles)." On a very few occasions one even went so far 
as to make a kind of confession of one's own guilt, for instance: 
"If only / had not put you among the fleeting-improvised- 
men," or "Well, such are the consequences of the renowned 
soul-policy," or "What is to become of the whole cursed af- 
fair," or "If only the cursed play-with-human-beings would 
cease." From time to time the confession was in these words: 
"The feeling is lacking," that is the feeling we ought to have 
for every decent human being, even for the most abominable 
sinner, considering the means of purification provided in the 
Order of the World. For a time the aim of the whole devel- 
opment was expressed by the lower God in the phrase— 
grammatically incomplete as is so often the case in the soul- 
language: "Hope that voluptuousness reaches a degree," that is 
to say such a degree that divine rays would lose all interest in 
withdrawing, thus naturally resulting in a solution in conso- 
nance with the Order of the World. However, the lower God 
also had a number of other phrases in readiness which made 
me shudder, in other words I had to exert all my reason to try 
to uphold the conviction that he could not possibly succeed. 
There was talk of "colossal powers" on the part of God's om- 
nipotence and of "hopeless resistance" on my part; it was 
thought necessary to remind me that the possibility for God to 
withdraw was boundless with the often-repeated phrase: 
"Don't forget that eternity is boundless."
   Obviously what I have said above about the changed behav- 
ior of the upper and lower God and about the kind of phrases 
the latter used, contains a tangle of contradictions which can- 
not be unraveled. Almost insuperable difficulties arise even 
for me at every attempt to solve these contradictions; a really



MEMOIRS
satisfactory solution would only be possible if one had such 
complete insight into the nature of God which not even I have 
attained who have certainly gained deeper insight than all 
other human beings, because human capacity is limited. I will 
therefore only venture a few tentative remarks in this connec- 
tion with all the reservations arising from the insufficiency of 
the human apparatus for comprehension. Firstly I cannot pre- 
sume that the upper God's intellectual or moral standard is be- 
low that of the lower God. If the latter yet appears to surpass 
the former in that he recognizes what is possible and respects 
the Order of the World, I think this can be accounted for by the 
upper God's greater distance from me compared with the 
lower God's.
   The lower and the upper God apparently have in common 
that they are not able to understand the living human being 
as an organism while they are at a distance-, both in particular 
seem to be caught up in the mistaken notion hardly under- 
standable for a human being, that everything which becomes 
appreciable to them from the nerves of a human being in my 
position, mostly only in consequence of the falsification of 
thoughts by the rays, is to be regarded as the manifestation of the 
human being's own thinking activity; also that cessation of 
thinking, however temporary, and the resulting state in which 
definite thoughts formulated in words do not echo from the 
nerves of a human being in a form appreciable to the rays, im- 
plies that this person's mental capacities are extinct, or to use 
a common though obviously misunderstood" human expres- 
sion, the advent of dementia. It appears then that God in both 
His forms tends to the erroneous idea that the nerve-language 
resulting from the vibrations of the nerves (compare the begin- 
ning of Chapter 5) is to be regarded as the real language of the



.	...
human being. Thus, as some excitation of nerves also occurs 
in a sleeping person when dreaming, one failed to distinguish 
between the mental activity of a dreaming and that of a fully 
conscious person using his power of thinking. Naturally I am 
referring only to my own case, that is to say a case in which 
God entered into continual contact by rays with a single hu- 
man being, a contact which could no longer be severed and 
which therefore was contrary to the Order of the World. All 
these erroneous™ ideas which have been mentioned seem only 
to be given up when God has come closer and then suddenly 
realizes from my behavior, my activities and perhaps even 
from my conversation with other people, etc., that He is still 
dealing with a human being of completely unimpaired mental 
powers.
   It seems to be impossible for God to draw a lesson for the 
future from such an experience, perhaps because of some qual- 
ities innate in His nature. For these phenomena are repeated in 
exactly the same way year in year out, day after day, particu- 
larly the attempt to withdraw at first sight (in the twinkle of 
an eye) with every pause in my thinking activity (when the 
not-thinking-of-anything-thought starts), and the assumption 
that I have then succumbed to dementia; this is usually ex- 
pressed in the fatuous phrase "Now he should {scilicet think or 
say) I will resign myself to the fact that I am stupid," followed 
in senseless monotony like a barrel-organ by all the other 
tasteless forms of speech "Why do you not say it (aloud)?," or



MEMOIRS
"But then for how much longer" {scilicet will your defense 
against the power of the rays still be successful), etc., etc.; this 
goes on until I proceed to take up some new occupation which 
proves my undiminished mental powers. It is an extremely 
difficult question even for me to explain this inability on the 
part of God to learn by experience. Perhaps one has to think 
of it in this way, that the more correct insight is only gained 
by the most forward nerve endings which are however al- 
ready condemned to dissolve in my body,- those parts at a 
distance which start the withdrawal action do not partake in 
this impression or at least not to an extent sufficient for them 
to change their minds.™ It therefore seems to me very doubt- 
ful whether it makes any practical difference if, as mentioned 
above, the lower God has included a number of correct ideas 
in his collection of phrases which he makes the voices which 
issue from him speak into my head. In any case these 
thoughts contain nothing new for me, and the upper God 
receiving only a foimal acquaintance with them is apparently 
quite unable to assimilate them, that is to change his usual 
mode of action. As the lower God is informed of the true 
state of affairs sooner than the upper God, he possibly allowed 
himself to be led by the idea that rays must speak (compare 
Chapter 9); this being so, it would be preferable that the 
content of these spoken words made sense—even if in endless 
repetition—and not consist of sheer nonsense or frank vulgari- 
ties. A long time ago I formulated the idea that God cannot
172



The soul's state of Blessedness . . .
learn by experience, in written notes*" as follows: "Every at- 
tempt at an educative influence directed outwards must be 
given up as hopeless"; every day which has since passed has 
confirmed the correctness of this opinion. But here again as on 
earlier similar occasions I feel I must protect the reader from 
possible misunderstanding. Religiously minded people who are 
filled with the concept of God's omnipotence, omniscience 
and loving kindness must find it incomprehensible that God 
should here be depicted as so lowly a Being that He can be 
surpassed both morally and mentally by one single human be- 
ing. However, I must emphasize that my superiority in both 
respects is to be understood in the most relative sense. I main- 
tain such a superiority only as it concerns the condition con- 
trary to the Order of the World originating from permanent 
and indissoluble nerve-contact with one single human being. 
In this respect I am both the more reasonable and the better 
part. Man knows his own nature and in addition I have come 
to know the soul-character so thoroughly through years of 
contact with them as no other human being has before. God 
on the other hand does not know the living human being and 
indeed He had no need to know him, as I have repeatedly 
stressed before. This is by no means irreconcilable with my 
acknowledging God's eternal wisdom and goodness in all other



MEMOIRS
respects, particularly in supernatural matters such as the cre- 
ation and evolution of the world."
   I would like to end this chapter by remarking that now 
at the end of almost five years, things have developed so far 
that the upper God has taken up the same attitude towards me 
as the lower God has done since the change of circumstances 
described in this chapter. The miracles of the upper God are 
beginning to assume the harmless character which mostly has 
characterized the miracles of the lower God. As example I will 
only mention my cigar ash being thrown about on the table or 
on the piano, my mouth and my hands being soiled with food 
during meals, etc. It nils me with satisfaction that I predicted 
this development of things years ago. As proof I will quote the 
relative entry in my diary (number 17 of 8th March 1898):
"We would like to express the opinion by way of conjec- 
tuie, that perhaps even the posterior Ormuzd will lose 
his interest in disturbing voluptuousness, like the poste- 
rior Ariman has lost it in the last two and a half years, so 
that inner voluptuousness transfigured and ennobled by 
human imagination would offer greater attraction than 
outer f g when contrary to the Order of the World."
   A few explanatory remarks are necessary to understand this 
quotation. "Posterior" Ariman and "posterior" Ormuzd were 
the names given (first by the voices and not by me) to the



The soul's state of Blessedness . . .
lower God and upper God respectively, when one or the other 
had got behind by the other pushing into the foreground, 
which occurred innumerable times daily. "Inner voluptuous- 
ness" is the soul-voluptuousness which originates in my body. 
The expression "outward f g contrary to the Order of the 
World," refers to my observations that the taking up of putrid 
matter by pure rays is connected with a kind of voluptuous 
sensation for them. The choice of the word "f g" is 
not due to my liking for vulgar terms, but having had to listen 
to the words "f .. k" and "f g" thousands of times, I have 
used the term for short in this little note to indicate the 
behavior of rays which was contrary to the Order of the World.



"Tested souls"; their fate. 
Personal experiences 
continued
BESIDES THE EVENTS described in the previous chap- 
ter, certain changes in the heavenly conditions occurred during 
that time and in the following year or two which, although less 
important, are touched on here for the sake of completeness. 
They concern mainly the fate of "tested souls." These as men- 
tioned before had been very numerous for some time in conse- 
quence of the partition of souls. A large part of them were 
occupied almost only in participating in the so-called "circum- 
ventory movements," a maneuver invented by the main parts 
of Flechsig's soul; its purpose was to attack the innocently ap- 
proaching divine rays from behind and so force them to surren- 
der. The picture of this phenomenon is still distinct in my 
memory; but I must forego describing it in words; nor am I 
able to say with certainty whether this phenomenon belonged 
to a time before or after the "tying-to-celestial-bodies."
   So much is certain, that the great number of "tested soul- 
parts" had eventually become a nuisance to God's omnipo- 
tence itself. After I had succeeded in drawing down to myself a
176



"Tested souls"; their fate . . .
considerable part of them, God's omnipotence started a raid 
among them one particular day,- the consequence was that 
from then on Flechsig's soul remained only in one or two 
shapes and von W.'s soul in one single shape. The latter seems 
even to have given up the tying voluntarily; from then on it sat 
for some time—probably a year—mostly in my mouth or eyes, 
troubling me only little, in fact even providing me with some 
entertainment, as I could keep up a kind of exchange of ideas 
with it, in which I however was almost always the giving and 
von W.'s soul the receiving part. I still remember with some 
amusement the very funny impression this soul made when 
finally almost completely without thoughts and limited only 
to visual impressions, it started to join in searching when I 
was looking for some object in my environment, that is to say 
it joined in looking out of my eyes.*^ About the end of 1897 
von W.'s soul eventually disappeared altogether unnoticed by 
me. I had lately become so accustomed to its company that 
one day, not having thought of it for some time, I suddenly 
realized that it had vanished; I found myself moved to play 
the funeral march from Beethoven's "Eroica" on the piano in 
honor of its departing.
   Flechsig's soul is still present as a meager remnant (tied on 
to somewhere); but I have good reason to assume that it long 
ago lost its intelligence, that is to say it is now also totally de- 
void of thoughts, so that it can hardly even enjoy with satis- 
faction its own heavenly existence, which it had unlawfully 
achieved against God's omnipotence—and this once again rep- 
resents one of the most glowing confirmations of the Order 
of the World, according to which nothing can maintain itself 
permanently which contradicts it.
   And so the previous "tested souls" vanished from the



MEMOIRS
scene—with one small exception. Thinking of this event I 
cannot refrain from giving a few details of the very peculiar 
names which they had up to their disappearance. Even if they 
are of little interest to readers, it is important for me to re- 
member them and so keep fresh the terrifying and gruesome 
memories connected with them. The total opposition to God's 
omnipotence consisting of Flechsig's and v. W.'s soul parts as 
well as their other party followers (advance guards, etc.) called 
themselves for some time the "so-what-party." This hack- 
neyed phrase originated from Flechsig's soul which had the 
habit of answering all questions about what was to become of 
this whole "cursed affair" (that the whole affair had gone ut- 
terly astray seems to have been known to God's omnipotence) 
with a mocking and indifferent "so what." This answer again 
is most characteristic of the soul-character; souls after all 
know of no care for the future, but let momentary enjoyment 
suffice. Translated into the human sphere the "so what" of 
Flechsig's soul would mean "I do not care a damn for the fu- 
ture, as long as I feel well at the moment." Therefore when 
only two parts of Flechsig's soul remained, the more distant 
one was called "the posterior Flechsig," and the one that was a 
little nearer, by the way the one that had always been of 
weaker intelligence, was called the middle "so-what-party."
   Of von W.'s soul parts the "abdominal putrefaction of von 
W." has been mentioned earlier; this probably had the most 
impure nerves and therefore exhibited the most abominable 
intent towards me, and towards God's omnipotence unabashed 
impudence. This found expression in certain classical phrases 
which did not fît in with the movement of my own nerves, nor 
with the accustomed rhythm of the rays, such as "in a way 
this is unbearable," "permit me," etc. (the latter expression 
was used when it was to be dislodged from its position). It 
hung on the opposite wall of my bedroom when I was lying in 
bed. It was almost equaled in impudence of intent by the



"Tested souls"; their fate . . .
so-called "mid-day" von W.; it had this name because it was 
said to have charge of meals, particularly mid-day meals. A 
more decent, almost reasonable, if changeable character, was 
shown by two other of von W.'s soul's shapes, the "anyhow" 
von W. and the "O damn" von W., both names used by them- 
selves. The phrase "O damn" in particular was a remnant of 
the basic language, in which the words "O damn, that is hard 
to say" were used whenever the souls became aware of a hap- 
pening inconsistent with the Order of the World, for instance 
"O damn, it is extremely hard to say that God allows himself 
tobef "
   Particularly dangerous for a time was a really very small 
part of von W.'s soul which was called "the scourge of von W." 
because of a miracle practiced exclusively by him. He used to 
move a little scourge about in my skull, and with it caused se- 
rious destruction and often fairly severe pain.
   During the time of my stay in Dr. Pierson's Asylum ("the 
Devil's Kitchen"! there was also a shape of von W.'s soul for 
the formation of which some of my own nerves must have 
been used, because it was called "the little von W.-Schreber." 
This was the best intentioned of all; "he" sometimes even 
achieved (in his miracles) the so-called "golden drop," a mira- 
cle usually practiced only by God's omnipotence in which 
some fluid like balsam was placed on damaged parts of my 
head and elsewhere—I could feel it distinctly—so that all at 
once an immediate curative effect was achieved.
   My outward life was no longer quite as monotonous during 
the time after the change described in Chapter 13 as it had 
been earlier in the period of my immobility,- yet there was lit- 
tle variety, as may be expected from living in an Asylum. I still 
spent the best part of my time playing the piano and chess; the 
number of printed scores at my disposal had grown consider- 
ably through presents from my relatives.
   I started to make written notes as I had been provided



MEMOIRS
with some colored pencils and later with other writing mate- 
rial; my circumstances were so pitiful that even a pencil or 
a rubber was guarded by me like a real treasure. My note- 
taking consisted at first only of a few unconnected thoughts 
or words which I put down; later—beginning with the year 
1897—I started to keep regular diaries, in which I entered all 
my experiences; earlier—but still in 1896—I was limited to 
meager entries in a small calendar. But I also started to sketch 
my future "Memoirs," which I had already planned. This 
sketch is contained in a little brown book, entitled "From my 
Life"; it has served me as a welcome support of my memory 
while elaborating the present "Memoirs." Anybody interested 
in this sketch—^which was kept in shorthand—would find 
there many more items which I have not incorporated into my 
"Memoirs"; they show the reader that the content of my reve- 
lations was immeasurably richer than what I could incorporate 
in the limited space of the "Memoirs." Finally—since the late 
autumn of 1897^1 have written down certain observations 
mentioned in footnote 80 and the Little Studies in small note- 
books B, C and /.
   From the start I have had jand I sometimes still have) great 
difficulties with meals which until Easter of this year (1900) I 
took by myself in my room. Nobody can imagine how great 
the difficulties were with which I had to fight; while I was eat- 
ing, miracles were continually produced inside my mouth; and 
even the nonsensical questions continued: "Why don't you say 
it (aloud)?," etc., although speaking aloud is impossible when 
one has one's mouth full of food. My teeth were constantly in 
danger; indeed several times during meals some of my teeth 
were broken by miracle. Frequently diu"ing meals a miracle 
was effected of biting my tongue. The hairs of my mustache 
were almost regularly miracled into my mouth with the food 
so that this alone, had no other reason existed, would have 
made me shave it off in August 1896. To shave my mustache



"Tested souls"; their fate . . .
off had become a necessity for me for other reasons, however 
little I liked myself—in day-time—with a clean-shaven face. 
Considering the conditions discussed in Chapter 13 it became 
necessary for me, at least at night-time, to support my imagi- 
nation of being a female, and a mustache would naturally have 
been an insurmountable obstacle for this illusion. While I ate 
alone I had almost regularly to play the piano or to read during 
meal-times because, it was imperative even during meals to 
furnish the distant God*^ with proof that my mental powers 
were intact; had I not wanted to do this I would have had to eat 
my meals standing up or walking about.
   As mentioned earlier—and anticipating a little in time—I 
passed the nights during the two and a half years from May 
1896 to December 1898 not in the room allotted to me, that is 
in the bedroom adjoining my living-room, but in the padded 
cells for dements on the ground floor and on the first floor of 
the round wing of the Asylum. The reason for this regulation I 
cannot understand even today. It is true during the first years 
of my stay in this Asylum scenes of violence occurred between 
me and other patients, several times also with the attendants. I 
have noted all these instances down; all in all there were about 
ten to twelve such occurrences, the last of which took place on 
the 5th of March 1898; by the way, in all instances concerning 
other patients I was always the attacked party.



MEMOIRS
   The deeper reasons which led to these scenes of violence I 
will discuss later. At any rate I cannot believe that the doctors 
could have regarded me as a person in general given to mania- 
cal outbursts because of these rare events, as they also had the 
opportunity of observing that during day-time I occupied my- 
self decently, quietly and in accordance with my intellectual 
standing by playing the piano, playing chess, and later reading 
books and newspapers. It is possible that every now and then I 
spoke out aloud at night—which I was forced to do for reasons 
mentioned in footnote 63; it is therefore possible that other pa- 
tients sleeping on the same corridor or above me could occa- 
sionally have had grounds for complaint. But here too it was 
not a question of disturbances of the peace which occurred 
every night, not even most nights, and in any case quite often I 
have to suffer similarly through other patients, although my 
bedroom is fairly separate from the other bedrooms.
   I must therefore regard it as an extremely strange regulation 
that I was made to sleep in cells furnished for maniacal patients 
for fully two and a half years with the exception of only a few 
nightS; there was nothing in these cells apart from an iron bed- 
stead, a bedpan and some bedding, and over and above this most 
of the time they were completely blacked out by heavy wooden 
shutters. I repeat that I do not wish to raise any complaints 
about the past; however, I cannot but assume that some degree 
of vis inertiae allowed a state of affairs to persist although it 
had become unbearable and despite the fact that the reasons 
which led to such a measure no longer actually existed.
   I think I can fairly maintain that nothing similar happened 
to any other patient in the Asylnm-, cases of periodic mania are 
locked up in cells but are, as far as I know, kept there only for a 
few weeks.
   Therefore, however little I intend lending the subsequent 
description any personal acrimony, nevertheless an account of 
how unbearably I suffered during this stay in the cells belongs



...
to the complete picture of the story of my sufferings. My sleep 
is, as shown before, exclusively dependent on the heavenly 
constellations; sleep becomes impossible for me as soon as 
God has withdrawn to too great a distance, which periodically 
happens for half a day or at least several hours. If I then have to 
remain awake, the senseless twaddle of voices in my head 
causes an absolutely unbearable mental martyrdom; added to 
this are, for over twelve months, more or less severe states of 
bellowing to be described later, which occur whenever I can- 
not convince the distant God, who believes I have become de- 
mented, that this is not so.
   But how was I to do this in sleepless nights in the cell in 
which I lacked light as well as any objects which could be used 
for some occupation? It was impossible to remain in bed, and 
groping around in the darkened cell clad only in a shirt, with 
bare feet—as even my slippers were taken away—was naturally 
extremely boring, and in winter-time very cold and further not 
without danger because miracles directed my head against the 
low beams of the cell. Necessity is the mother of invention, 
and so in the course of those years I had recourse to all kinds of 
measures in order to spend the time in a somewhat bearable 
way. Sometimes almost for hours on end I tied knots in the 
four corners of my handkerchief and untied them again, partly 
in bed and partly while walking around recalled aloud some 
memories from my life, counted aloud, particularly in French— 
because questions were also constantly directed at whether I 
could still speak "foreign languages"; produced parts of my 
historical and geographical knowledge, for instance repeated 
all the Russian Governments and French Departments, etc., 
etc. Naturally I did not like to speak aloud as this meant giving 
up my sleep, but frequently I could do nothing else. Very 
painful was the lack of a clock and of matches, because when I 
woke up at night after some sleep I could not tell the time and 
did not know what best to do for the rest of the night.



MEMOIRS
   When towards the end of my time in the cells the shutters 
were no longer closed, I occupied myself with observing the 
starry sky/" and by means of a map of the stars which I had 
studied during the day I managed to tell the time at night with 
a fair degree of accuracy, just like the people of old. As long as 
the shutters were closed I often thundered against them with 
my fists until my hands were raw; once I succeeded in knock- 
ing a shutter down by force which had already been loosened 
by miracle, with the result that the cross-bar was by miracle 
made to descend on my head with such force that my head and 
my chest were covered with blood. Conditions have latterly 
improved a little by my taking a small metal container into 
the cell with me in which I keep little belongings, a pencil, 
paper, a so-called pocket-chess-board [in English in the origi- 
nal], etc., with which at least during the summer it was possi- 
ble to occupy myself from daybreak on. I have already said that 
I suffered these conditions for two and a half years-, in the las 
resort only because human beings did not appreciate supernat- 
ural matters.
H
184



"Play-with-human-beings" and 
"Miracles." Cries of help. 
Talking birds
SOME TIME AFTER the change recounted in Chapter 13, 
perhaps at the end of 1895 or the beginning of 1896, I had a 
number of experiences which led me to a critical examination 
of my ideas about the "fleeting-improvised-men," "play-with- 
human-beings," and suchlike, in consequence of which I ar- 
rived at a slightly different point of view.
   In particular I remember three events which made me 
hesitate whether what until then I had considered true 
and correct was really so: firstly taking part in the Christ- 
mas festivities of the family of the Director of the Asylum 
Dr. Weber in the year 1895; secondly receiving a letter from 
my sister-in-law in Cologne on the Rhine addressed to me 
and bearing the postmark of Cologne,- thirdly a children's 
procession celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
Peace of Frankfurt—10th of May 1896—which I saw from my 
window passing along a street of a suburb of Pirna which 
runs below it. After these and similar events—soon regular 
correspondence was added and reading newspapers which



MEMOIRS
were subscribed for by my relatives—I could no longer doubt 
that a real race of human beings in the same number and 
distribution as before did in fact exist. But this caused diffi- 
culties; how was I to combine this fact with my earlier im- 
pressions apparently pointing to the contrary. This difficulty 
remains even today, and I must confess that I am faced with 
an unsolved riddle, one which is probably insoluble for human 
beings.
   I have no doubt whatever that my early ideas were not 
simply "delusions" and "hallucinations" because even now 
I still receive impressions daily and hourly which make it 
perfectly clear to me that, in Hamlet's words, there is some- 
thing rotten in the state of Denmark—that is to say in the 
relationship between God and mankind. But how the present 
state of things developed historically, whether by sudden 
changes or gradual transition, and to what extent apart from 
the manifestations of life caused by the influence of rays 
(miracles), manifestations of life occur independently and 
uninfluenced by the rays, remains even for me an obscure 
point.""" I am quite sure that expressions and phrases like 
"fleeting-improvised-men" and " cursed-play-with-human- 
beings," the questions: "What is going to happen to this 
cursed affair?," etc., as well as the talk about "new human 
beings from Schreber's spirit" did not originate in my head, 
but were spoken into it from outside. This alone would make 
me assume that the ideas connected with them have some 
basis in reality corresponding to some historical events. 
Moreover in the course of the last six years I have un- 
intermittently received impressions—and still receive them 
daily and hourly—which furnish me with incontestable 
proof that everything spoken and done by human beings near
186



"Play-with-human-beings" . . .
me is due to the effect of miracles and directly connected 
with the rays coming nearer and alternately striving to with- 
draw again.
   I have already mentioned in Chapter 7 that every word spo- 
ken near me or with me, every human action however small 
which is combined with some noise, for instance opening the 
door-locks on my corridor, pressing the latch on the door of my 
room, the entry of an attendant into my room, etc., is accom- 
panied by a sensation of a painful blow directed at my head; 
the sensation of pain is like a sudden pulling inside my head 
which calls forth a very unpleasant feeling as soon as God has 
withdrawn to an excessive distance, and may be combined 
with the tearing off of part of the bony substance of my skull— 
at least that is how it feels. As long as I talk aloud—in my 
room or in the garden—turned towards God, everything around 
me is deathly quiet and God has no wish to withdraw, as He 
receives the direct impression of the activity of a human being 
in complete possession of his senses. This creates a feeling in 
me at times as if I were moving among walking corpses, so 
completely'* seem the people (attendants and patients) sud- 
denly to have lost the capacity to say one single word. The




MEMOIRS
same happens as long as my gaze rests on a female being. But 
as soon as I turn my gaze or allow my eyes to be closed by 
miracles, or as soon as I change from talking aloud to silence 
without at the same time starting some mental occupation, in 
other words when I give myself up to thinking nothing, the 
following phenomena which are interrelated occur almost at 
once (at first sight):
   (1)	Noises aroimd me, mostly consisting in violent out- 
bursts among the lunatics who of course form the majority of 
those around mc;
   (2)	In my own person the advent of the bellowing-miracle 
when my muscles serving the processes of respiration are set 
in motion by the lower God (Ariman) in such a way that I am 
forced to emit bellowing noises, unless I try very hard to sup- 
press them; sometimes this bellowing recurs so frequently and 
so quickly that it becomes almost unbearable and at night 
makes it impossible to remain in bed;
   (3)	The winds arise, however not uninfluenced by the exist- 
ing state of the weather; but short blasts of wind coinciding 
with pauses in my thinking are quite unmistakable;
   (4)	The cries of "help" of those of God's nerves separated 
from the total mass, sound the more woeful the farther away 
God has withdrawn from me, and the greater therefore the dis- 
tance which those nerves have to travel, obviously in a state of 
some anxiety.
   All these phenomena happen hundreds of times every day; 
I must have observed them in the course of years tens of 
thousands if not hundreds of thousands of times with exactly 
the same regularity. I have repeatedly pointed to the reason. 
Every time my thinking activity ceases God instantly regards 
my mental powers as extinct, the desired destruction of my
188



"Play-with-human-beings" . .
reason*' (the "dementia") achieved and the possibihty of a 
withdrawal thus brought about.
   And so the withdrawal action is started, and to achieve it 
an "interference" produced by miracle in the sense given in 
Chapter 10, page 136. This is the noise mentioned in (1) above. 
Simultaneously and almost immediately the so-called bellow- 
ing-miracle is produced by the lower God ([2] above). It seems 
to serve a double purpose, namely to create by "representing" 
the impression of a person bellowing because he is demented; 
and also to drown by bellowing the inner voices which the 
upper God started so that he could withdraw to a greater dis- 
tance; in this way the lower God, who seems somehow aware 
of the necessity of allowing himself to be attracted, could 
count on a union of all rays and on soul-voluptuousness 
which it causes in my body; in other words he could safeguard 
himself from entering my body without soul-voluptuousness. 
Withdrawal to a greater distance at once causes (see [3]) the 
wind to arise (compare Chapter 1). Nevertheless the upper 
God soon becomes aware that the hoped-for cessation of the 
power of attraction of my nerves has once again not been 
achieved but rather persists undiminished; this causes a state 
of anxiety in those of God's nerves which first became 
separated (see [4]) and is expressed with genuine feeling in cries 
of "help." It remains a riddle to me that the cries of help are 
apparently not heard by other human beings:" the sound which 
reaches my own ear—hundreds of times every day—is so 
definite that it cannot be a hallucination. The genuine "cries




MEMOIRS
of help" are always instantly followed by the phrase which 
has been learnt by rote: "If only the cursed cries of help 
would stop."
   That all signs of life of human beings around me, par- 
ticularly their speech, are caused by miracles (influence of 
rays), is clearly shown also in the content of what is said. I 
must expand this in order to make it clear. As already 
remarked on page 126, Chapter 9, when God started the 
tying-to-celestial-bodies (page 122) He spared not only the 
tested souls which were still about, but also what was left 
of the erstwhile "forecourts of heaven"—that is to say the 
blessed souls of human beings; the purpose was to load them 
with poison of corpses when the power of attraction of my 
nerves caused them to come nearer, and send them out in 
advance as outposts and so slow down the attraction of the 
genuine rays of God. One probably also believed that at least 
one could choke me through the mass of poison of corpses 
which in this manner was daily heaped upon my body, that 
is to say be able to kill me or destroy my reason. These 
nerves (the remnants of the forecourts of heaven) have ap- 
peared for years in the shape of birds created by miracle, 
thereby manifesting a mysterious connection with the in- 
nermost nature of divine creation; insofar they are unfath- 
omable even to me. But the fact itself that the nerves which 
are inside these birds are remnants (single nerves) of souls of 
human beings who had become blessed is absolutely certain 
because of my observations repeated thousands of times every 
day for years.
   I recognize the individual nerves exactly by the tone of 
their voices from years of hearing them; I know exactly which 
of the senseless phrases learnt by rote I can expect of each 
one of them, according to whether they are emitted from the 
camp of the lower God or from that of the upper God (pro- 
duced by miracle by the latter or the former). Their property as



"Play-with-human-beings" . . .
erstwhile human nerves is evidenced by the fact that all the 
miraculously produced birds without exception, whenever 
they have completely unloaded the poison of corpses which 
they carry, that is to say when they have reeled off the phrases 
drummed into them, then express in human sounds the gen- 
uine feeling of well-being in the soul-voluptuousness of my 
body which they share, with the words "Damned fellow'"" 
or "Somehow damned," the only words in which they aie 
still capable of giving expression to genuine feeling. They have 
not the least understanding of what they have spoken before, 
i.e. for the phrases learnt by rote—to retain this expression 
which naturally is only to be understood figuratively; they 
reel them off without knowing the sense of the words,- it 
seems that otherwise their intelligence is no higher than that 
of natural birds.
   I cannot say how their nerves are made to vibrate in such a 
manner that sounds spoken or more correctly lisped by them 
sound like human words, of which the phrases learnt by rote 
are composed: I therefore cannot explain the technicalities of 
the matter, but I presume that it is a question of supernatural 
matters which therefore are completely incomprehensible to 
human beings.*' But their effect is well known to me from years 
of experience; it consists in the nerves of the miraculously



MEMOIRS
created birds being made immune against all sensation which 
they would otherwise have when entering my body, partic- 
ularly against soul-voluptuousness or visual impressions, as 
long as they are occupied with reeling off the phrases drummed 
into them (learnt by rote), just as if they entered into me blind- 
folded or with their natural capacity for feeling somehow sus- 
pended. This after all is the purpose of the whole business and 
also the reason for the tempo of these automatic phrases being 
more and more slowed down in the course of years—in propor- 
tion to the increase of soul-voluptuousness: the destructive 
power of the poison of corpses carried by the entering voices 
was to be maintained as long as possible. With it, however, a 
most peculiar phenomenon arose which is of the greatest im- 
portance for the extent of the damage the voices or rays con- 
cerned cause in my body.
   It has already been mentioned that the miraculously cre- 
ated birds do not understand the meaning of the words they 
speak; but apparently they have a natural sensitivity for simi- 
larity of sounds. Therefore if, while reeling off the automatic 
phrases, they perceive either in the vibrations of my own 
nerves (my thoughts) or in speech of people around me, words 
which sound the same or similar to their own phrases, they ap- 
parently experience surprise and in a way fall for the similarity 
in sound; in other words the surprise makes them forget the 
rest of their mechanical phrases and they suddenly pass over 
into genuine feeling.
   It has already been said that the sounds need not be com- 
pletely identical; a similarity suffices, as in any case the birds 
do not understand the sense of the words; therefore it matters 
little to them—in order to give some examples—whether one 
speaks of
   "Santiago" or "Carthago"
   "Chinesenthum" or "Jesum Christum"
   "Abendroth" or "Athemnoth"




"Play-with-human-beings" . . .
   "Ariman" or "Ackermann"
   "Briefbeschwerer" or "Herr Prüfer schwört."
etc., etc.'"
   To confuse these talking birds by deliberately throwing in 
similar sounding words became a kind of pastime in the 
voices' almost unbearably tedious twaddle which afforded me 
a somewhat queer amusement. However droll this may sound 
the matter also has its serious side. The upper and lower Gods 
who also know that the miraculously created birds fall for sim- 
ilar sounds, use this peculiarity as a trump card against each 
other. Each wants to hold back and push the other forward; 
whenever the birds fall for similarity of sound, the attraction 
of that part is increased from whose camp the voices emanate. 
Thus the upper God likes to make persons around me say 
those words which belong to the writing-down-material and to 
the voices of the lower God and vice versa, while I for my part, 
aiming at a union of all rays and so at a uniform attraction, al- 
ways have to counteract these efforts. Here too I could furnish 
as many examples as there are grains of sand in the sea.
   To mention only a few: "electric light" and "railways," as 
well as—in the connection mentioned on page 169 Chapter 
13—the "colossal powers" and the "hopeless resistance" 
belong to the writing-down-material of the lower God. The 
upper God therefore causes a conversation carried on in my 
presence—also during meals at the Director's table—to turn 
to "electric railways," everything is found "colossal" and at 
every opportune or inopportune moment one speaks of 
"hopes" so frequently that it is astounding and excludes all 
possibility of coincidence. This alone—apart from much else— 
constitutes absolute proof for me that the nerves of the human



MEMOIRS
beings who use these words are made to do so through the in- 
fluence of rays {miracles}—naturally without their knowing it; 
in other words it is proof of the reality of the so-called "play- 
with-human-beings" about which the lower God used to speak 
innumerable times in earlier years. Here too I am conscious of 
how incredible all this must seem to other human beings; but 
what I said above is strengthened by hourly and daily experi- 
ences, in every place and at every opportunity so overwhelm- 
ingly, that it precludes any doubt for me in the objectivity of 
these circumstances. I may perhaps later go into further details.
   I want to add something about the birds created by miracle; 
it is queer that the individual nerves or souls which are in 
them appear in the shape of different kinds of birds according 
to the season of the year. The same nerves are in the spring 
contained in the bodies of finches or other singing birds, in the 
summer in those of swallows, and in winter in those of spar- 
rows or crows. I have no doubt about the identity of the souls 
concerned because I know the tone of their voices well, and I 
recognize the phrases I regularly hear from them and which 
have, so to speak, been crammed into them.'^
   This naturally leads to the question whether they can pos- 
sibly have a continual life or whether they have to be created 
anew by miracles every day or anyway at longer intervals of 
time. I can only raise but not answer this question. I observe 
that the miraculously created birds feed and empty themselves



"Play-with-human-beings" . . .
in the manner of natural birds; it would therefore be possible 
that the miraculously created state is maintained for a time 
by taking in nourishment; I have also repeatedly observed 
them building nests in the spring which appears to point to 
some powers of reproduction. Their language on the other 
hand makes it certain for me that in other respects they are 
not completely natural birds. They are very numerous, appar- 
ently appear in hundreds, so that I dare not give any definite 
estimate of their number. From their spoken phrases they can 
easily be distinguished into two groups, one emanating from 
the upper and the other from the lower God.
   Of the lower God's group one soul in bird's form is usually 
around me; for years therefore the voices have called it "my lit- 
tle friend. " In the spring it usually appears as a woodpecker or 
blackbird, in the summer as a swallow and in the winter as a 
sparrow. The joking title "picus, the woodpecker," is used by the 
other voices even when it appears as a blackbird, swallow or 
sparrow. I know exactly the numerous phrases given it to repeat 
constantly in the course of the years, and I have often made 
lists of them as also of those of the other miraculously created 
birds; they always proved correct. To a large number of the 
other bird-souls I jokingly gave girls' names in order to distin- 
guish them, because all of them can best be compared to little 
girls in their curiosity, their inclination to voluptuousness, etc. 
These girls' names were then taken up by God's rays and used 
for the respective bird-souls concerned. To the miraculously 
created birds belong all fairly fast flying birds, particularly all 
singing birds, swallows, sparrows, crows, etc.; of these species 
of birds I have never once during these years seen a single 
specimen which did not speak. On both the occasions when I 
drove in a carriage this summer (1900)''they accompanied me



MEMOIRS
the whole way. On the other hand the pigeons in the court of 
this Asylum do not speak, neither as far as I have observed a 
canary kept in the servants' quarters, nor the chicken, geese 
and ducks which I have seen both from my window on the 
plots of land lying below the Asylum, and on the two men- 
tioned excursions in villages through which I passed; I must 
therefore presume that these were simply natural birds. The 
whole phenomenon of the talking birds is so marvelous and 
like a fairy tale that I would be most interested to observe bird 
life in other parts of the country; I cannot presume that leafy 
woods farther away totally lack a bird population.''"'



Compulsive thinking. Its 
effects and manifestation
16
IN THE PREVIOUS chapters I described the changes in 
my outward life during the past years and the forms the battle 
of annihilation assumed which divine rays led against me. I 
will now add some more about the forms—also vastly changed 
—of the constant compulsive thinking. Compulsive thinking 
has been defined in Chapter 5 as having to think continually; 
this contravenes man's natural right of mental relaxation, of 
temporary rest from mental activity through thinking nothing, 
or as the expression goes in the basic language, it disturbs the 
"basis" of a human being. My nerves are influenced by the 
rays to vibrate corresponding to certain human words; their 
choice therefore is not subject to my own will, but is due to 
an influence exerted on me from without. From the beginning 
the system of not-flnishing-a-sentence prevailed, that is to 
say the vibrations caused in my nerves and the words so pro- 
duced contain not mainly finished thoughts, but unfinished 
ideas, or only fragments of ideas, which my nerves have to 
supplement to make up the sense. It is in the nature of nerves



MEMOIRS
that if unconnected words or started phrases are thrown into 
them, they automatically attempt to complete them to fin- 
ished thoughts satisfactory to the human mind.
   The system of not-finishing-a-sentence became more and 
more prevalent in the course of years, the more the souls 
lacked their own thoughts. In particular, for years single con- 
junctions or adverbs have been spoken into my nerves thou- 
sands of times; these ought only to introduce clauses, but it is 
left to my nerves to complete them in a manner satisfactory to 
a thinking mind. Thus for years I have heard daily in hundred- 
fold repetition incoherent words spoken into my nerves with- 
out any context, such as "Why not?," "Why, if," "Why, 
because I," "Be it," "With respect to him" (that is to say that 
something or other has to be thought or said with respect to 
myself); further an absolutely senseless "Oh" thrown into my 
nerves; finally certain fragments of sentences which were ear- 
lier on expressed completely; as for instance
   1.	"Now I shall,"
   2.	"You were to,"
   3.	"I shall,"
   4.	"It will be,"
   5.	"This of course was,"
   6.	"Lacking now is,"
etc. In order to give the reader some idea of the original mean- 
ing of these incomplete phrases I will add the way they used to 
be completed, but are now omitted and left to be completed by 
my nerves. The phrases ought to have been:
   1.	Now I shall resign myself to being stupid;
   2.	You were to be represented as denying God, as given to 
voluptuous excesses, etc.;
   1.	1 shall have to think about that first;
198



Compulsive thinking . .
   4.	It will be done now, the joint of pork;
   5.	This of course was too nmch from the soul's point of 
view;
   6.	Lacking now is only the leading idea, that is—we, the 
rays, have no thoughts.
   The rather tasteless phrase about the joint of pork (number 
4) is due to myself having used years ago the figure of speech 
"done like a joint of pork" in the nerve-language. This phrase 
was seized on and became a constantly recurring part of the 
speech-material. The "joint of pork" I was to refer to myself: it 
was meant to express that I was done, i.e. that my power of re- 
sistance against the attacks on my reason by the rays must by 
now be exhausted.
   The purpose of not-finishing-a-sentence is consistent with 
God's attitude to me throughout: to prevent dissolution in my 
body which would necessarily result from its attraction. While 
conditions prevailed which were at least somehow in conso- 
nance with the Order of the World, that is before tying-to-rays 
and tying-to-celestial-bodies was started (compare Chapter 9), 
a momentary uniform feeling was enough to make the freely 
suspended souls jump down from the sky into my mouth, thus 
ending their independent existence; an event, as mentioned in 
Chapter 7, page 86,1 actually experienced repeatedly. But mere 
"intellectual deliberation" had the same effect; whenever ex- 
pressed in a grammatically complete sentence, the rays would 
be led straight to me, and entering my body (though capable of 
withdrawing) temporarily increase its soul-voluptuousness. 
Not-finishing-a-sentence has apparently the effect that the 
rays are, as it were, held up half way, and could therefore with- 
draw before having added to soul-voluptuousness in my body; 
but even this does not permanently prevent the attraction 
completely; it only slows it down.
   It is hard to give a picture of the mental strain the



MEMOIRS
compulsive thinking imposed on me particularly after it had 
become so much w^orse, and what mental torture I had to suf- 
fer. During the first years my nerves indeed seemed irresistibly 
compelled to continue'* each started clause to the satisfaction 
of the human mind, much as in ordinary human intercourse 
an answer is regularly given to somebody's question.
   I will give an example to illustrate how such a need is in- 
herent in the nature of human nerves. Consider the case of par- 
ents or teachers being present during a school examination of 
their children. If they follow the examination attentively they 
will automatically answer every question in their mind, per- 
haps only in the form: "I am not at all sure whether the chil- 
dren will know this." Of course there is no mental compulsion 
for parents or teachers, they have only to divert their attention 
from the proceeding examination towards something else in 
their environment to spare their nerves this strain. This is the 
essential difference between this example and my case. The 
questions or querying particles spoken into my nerves compel 
my mind to work by setting the corresponding nerves in vibra- 
tion, in a way that they cannot possibly escape the impulse to 
think. I must leave undecided whether the expression I chose 
of my nerves being set in corresponding vibrations by the rays, 
covers the circumstances correctly; what I directly feel is that 
the talking voices (lately in particular the voices of the talking 
birds] as inner voices move like long threads into my head and 
there cause a painful feeling of tension through the poison of 
corpses which they deposit.
   In contra-distinction to these inner voices I hear outer 
voices particularly spoken by birds, which come to me from 
outside, from the birds' throats. However, in both cases my 
nerves cannot avoid the sound of the spoken words; the



Compulsive thinking . .
Stimulation of my nerves follows automatically and compels 
me to think on when I hear questions or incomplete thoughts. 
In earlier years my nerves simply had to think on, to answer 
questions, to complete broken-off sentences, etc. Only later 
was I gradually able to accustom my nerves (my "basis") to ig- 
noring the stimulation which forced them to think on, by sim- 
ply repeating the words and phrases and thus turning them 
into not-thinking-of-anything-thoughts. I have done that for a 
long time now with conjunctions and adverbs which would 
need a full clause for their completion. If I hear for instance 
"Why, because I," or "Be it," I repeat these words for as long as 
possible without attempting to complete the sense by trying to 
connect them with what I thought before.
   I proceed in the same manner when attempts are made 
with the words "If only my" to compel my nerves to develop 
ideas of fear, not really present in my mind but falsely imputed 
to me. I know what can be "expected" to follow—because 
as a rule the corresponding miracle happens simultaneously 
and I feel it on my body; the intended continuation is some- 
times "If only my voluptuousness were not disturbed," 
sometimes "If only my boots were not removed by mira- 
cle," sometimes "If only my nose, my eyes, my knee-cap, my 
skull, etc., would not be affected by miracles."
   Since my nerves have become accustomed to suppress the 
corresponding stimulation, I no longer elaborate in words 
the nonsense to which these falsified ideas lead; I am satis- 
fled to keep on repeating the same words "If only my" without 
adding anything to them. In ordinary conversation of course 
everybody would simply counter "If only my" with "What 
do you really mean," or perhaps would use abusive language in 
self-defense. This is very difficult for me because the rays 
regularly answer "We have had this before" (with the ef- 
fect mentioned in Chapter 9). It would in any case be un- 
endurable in the long run to submit nerves all day long



MEMOIRS
to the counter-question "What do you really mean/' or to 
abusive language.^^
   The infringement of the freedom of human thinking or more 
correctly thinking nothing, which constitutes the essence of 
compulsive thinking, became more unbearable in the course 
of years with the slowing down of the talk of the voices. This 
is connected with the increased soul-voluptuousness of my 
body and—despite all writing-down—with the great shortage 
of speech-material at the disposal of the rays with which to 
bridge the vast distances separating the stars, where they are 
suspended, from my body.
   No one who has not personally experienced these phe- 
nomena like I have can have any idea of the extent to 
which speech has slowed down. To say "But naturally" is 
spoken B.b.b.u.u.u.t.t.t. n.n.n.a.a.a.t.t.t.u.u.u.r.r.r.a.a.a.l.l.l.y.y.y, 
or "Why do you not then shit?" W.w.w.h.h.h.y.y.y



Compulsive thinking . .
d.d.d.O.O.o ; and each requires perhaps thirty to 
sixty seconds to be completed. This would be bound to cause 
such nervous impatience in every human being, not like my- 
self more and more inventive in using methods of defense, as 
to make him jump out of his skin; a faint idea of the nervous 
unrest caused is perhaps the example of a Judge or teacher 
always listening to a mentally dull witness or a stuttering 
scholar, who despite all attempts cannot clearly get out what 
he is asked or wants to say.
   Playing the piano and reading books and newspapers is—as 
far as the state of my head allows—my main defense, which 
makes even the most drawn-out voices finally perish; at night 
when this is not easily done or in day-time when the mind 
requires a change of occupation, I usually found committing 
poems to memory a successful remedy. I learnt a great number 
of poems by heart particularly Schiller's ballads, long sections 
of Schiller's and Goethe's dramas, as well as arias from operas 
and humorous poems, amongst others from Max and Moritz, 
Struwelpeter and Spekter's fables, which I then recite in si- 
lence on the quiet verbatim. Their value as poetry naturally 
does not matter; however insignificant the rhymes, even ob- 
scene verses are worth their weight in gold as mental nour- 
ishment compared with the terrible nonsense my nerves are 
otherwise forced to listen to.
   Even while reciting poems I have to combat difficulties 
which at times reduce their effectiveness; miracles aimed at 
scattering my thoughts act on my nerves and make it im- 
possible to find the continuation of a poem learnt by heart; or 
when the most persistent inner voices have at last been si- 
lenced by the recital of longer poems and I have reached a state 
of great soul-voluptuousness through union of all rays, the 
lower God starts the bellowing-miracle until I am so breath- 
less that I cannot continue reciting the poems even softly. I am 
therefore forced to change the systems much in the same way



MEMOIRS
as externally new systems are continually started (by God's 
omnipotence) to slow down the attraction of rays and prevent 
the union of all rays necessary for sleep or complete soul- 
voluptuousness. Recently I found counting aloud up to a large 
figure of great help, but this is naturally very boring for any 
length of time. When severe bodily pain sets in or persistent 
bellowing occurs, the last remaining remedy is swearing aloud 
which I have to do occasionally, but which I sincerely hope 
will become less and less necessary in future.
   All the above-described phenomena have changed in the 
course of years and are still subject to change in relation to 
the degree of soul-voluptuousness present at a given time 
and the distance to which God has withdrawn. But on the 
whole the predictions I made years ago become truer every 
day; the following excerpt from Little Study XIII, in notebook 
B, already mentioned in footnote 80, may serve as proof:
16TH JANUARY 1898
"In the meantime, that is to say during the years or 
decades which may pass until unmanning is completed, 
the direction of our policy is in general clear. There is no 
doubt whatever that things will become easier for us 
with every year, every day, every week, possible set- 
backs excepted, which are connected with the fact that 
elsewhere the necessary insight is lacking and will prob- 
ably never come about owing to the organization of 
God's realms and the soul-character,- therefore weak ef- 
forts will always be made to avoid the solution which is 
in consonance with the Order of the World."
   Because of its very characteristic meaning I must devote a 
few more remarks to the above-mentioned question "Why do 
you then not shit?," however indelicate the subject may be.



Compulsive thinking . . .
Like everything else in my body, the need to empty myself is 
also called forth by miracles,- this is done by forcing the feces 
in the bowel forwards (sometimes also backwards) and when 
owing to previous evacuation there is insufficient material 
present, the small remnants in the bowel are smeared on my 
backside. This miracle, initiated by the upper God, is repeated 
every day at least several dozen times. It is connected with the 
idea which is quite incomprehensible for human beings and 
can only be explained by God's complete lack of knowledge of 
the living human being as an organism, that "sh " is to a 
certain extent the final act; that is to say when the miracles 
produce the urge to sh.. the goal of destroying my reason is 
reached, and so the possibility afforded for a final withdrawal 
of the rays. Trying to trace the origin of this idea one must as- 
sume some misunderstanding of the symbolic meaning of the 
act of defecation, namely that he who entered into a special re- 
lationship to divine rays as I have is to a certain extent entitled 
to sh .. on all the world.
   At the same time, however, the whole perfidy" of the 
policy conducted towards me is clear. Whenever the need to 
defecate is produced by miracle, some other person in my envi- 
ronment is sent to the lavatory—by exciting the nerves of the 
person concerned—in order to prevent me from emptying my- 
self; this I have observed so frequently (thousands of times) 
and so regularly that one can exclude any thought of it being 
coincidence. The question "Why do you then not sh .. ?" is fol- 
lowed by the capital answer "Because I am somehow stupid." 
The pen almost resists writing down the fantastic nonsense



MEMOIRS
that God in His blindness and lack of knowledge of human 
nature in fact goes so far that He assumes a human being could 
exist who—something every animal is capable of doing— 
cannot sh.. for sheer stupidity. When I do empty myself— 
usually in a bucket because I almost always find the lavatory 
occupied—this act is always combined with a very strong de- 
velopment of soul-voluptuousness. Liberation from the pres- 
sure of feces present in the guts creates an intense feeling of 
well-being, particularly for the nerves of voluptuousness; the 
same happens when I pass water. For that reason all rays have 
always and without exception been united during evacuation 
and passing water; and for this very reason, namely to avoid a 
union of all rays, one attempts (usually unsuccessfully) to mir- 
acle away the urge.




Continuation of the above; 
"Picturing" in the sense of 
the soul-language
17
FROM THE ACCOUNT in the previous chapter, the 
reader will have gained the impression that the trials to which 
I am subjected by compulsive thinking have in many respects 
far exceeded the measure of demands which are usually made 
on human capacity and human patience. To be quite truthful I 
must add that there were also moments which at least occa- 
sionally offered a kind of recompense for the wrong done me. 
Apart from knowledge of supernatural matters gained in the 
course of years which I would not erase from my memory for 
all the gold on earth, I must also mention the mentally stimu- 
lating effect compulsive thinking has had on me. Throwing 
into my nerves unconnected conjunctions expressing causal or 
other relations ("Why only," "Why because," "Why because 
I," "Let it be then," "At least," etc.) forced me to ponder many 
things usually passed over by human beings, which made me 
think more deeply. All human activity near me, every view of 
nature in the garden or from my window stirs certain thoughts 
in me; when I then hear "Why only" or "Why because" spoken



MEMOIRS
into my nerves, I am forced or at least stimulated in immea- 
surably greater degree than other human beings to contem- 
plate the reason or purpose behind them.
   As one of many examples: while writing these lines a new 
house is being built in the Asylum garden and a new stove 
installed in the room adjoining mine. Watching this work the 
idea automatically arises: that man or various workmen are 
now occupied in doing this or that; if simultaneously with 
this thought a "And why" or "Why because" is spoken into 
my nerves, I am unavoidably forced to give myself an account 
of the reason and purpose of every single job. Similar things 
happened innumerable times in the course of years; reading 
books and newspapers particularly stimulates new thoughts. 
Being continually forced to trace the causal relation of every 
happening, every feeling, and every idea has given me gradu- 
ally deeper insight into the essence of almost all natural 
phenomena and aspects of human activity in art, science, etc., 
than is achieved by people who do not think it worth while 
to think about ordinary everyday occurrences. It is often not 
at all easy, particularly in the case of sensations and feelings, 
to account for reasons ("But why") satisfactorily; indeed most 
often the question why is inept, as for instance in such sen- 
tences as "This rose has a nice smell" or "This poem has 
a beautiful poetical expression" or "This is a magnificent 
painting" or "This piece of music is particularly melodious." 
Nevertheless this question is stimulated in me by the voices 
and moves me to think; but as I said before continual thinking 
is too wearying and I have though slowly learnt to extricate 
myself from it to some extent. Of course he who believes in 
the divine creation of the world can naturally always adduce as 
the last cause of all things and happenings the reason "Because 
God has created the world." But between this fact and the indi- 
vidual processes of life there are innumerable intermediate 
links which are eminently interesting to work out. Stimulated



Continuation of the above . . .
by compulsive thinking I occupied myself a great deal with et- 
ymological questions which I must say had interested me in 
earlier days of health.
   Finally a very ordinary event to illustrate the above: I meet 
a person I know by the name of Schneider. Seeing him the 
thought automatically arises "This man's name is Schneider" 
or "This is Mr. Schneider." With it "But why" or "Why because" 
also resounds in my nerves. In ordinary human contact the an- 
swer would probably be: "Why! What a silly question, the 
man's name is simply Schneider." But my nerves were unable 
or almost unable to behave like this. Their peace is disturbed 
once the question is put why this man should be Mr. Schneider 
or why he is called Mr. Schneider. This very peculiar question 
"why" occupies my nerves automatically—particularly if the 
question is repeated several times—until their thinking is di- 
verted in another direction. My nerves perhaps answer first: 
Well, the man's name is Schneider because his father was also 
called Schneider. But this trivial answer does not really pacify 
my nerves. Another chain of thought starts about why giving 
of names was introduced at all among people, its various forms 
among different peoples at different times, and the various cir- 
cumstances (profession, origin, particular physical qualities, 
etc.), which gave rise to them. Thus an extremely simple ob- 
servation under the pressure of compulsive thinking becomes 
the starting point of a very considerable mental task, usually 
not without bearing fruit.
   Another interesting phenomenon connected with the ray- 
communication—the real cause of compulsive thinking—is 
the so-called "pictming," which I have touched on earlier in 
Chapter 5. Perhaps nobody but myself, not even science, 
knows that man retains all recollections in his memory, by 
virtue of lasting impressions on his nerves, as pictures in his 
head. Because my inner nervous system is illuminated by rays, 
these pictures can be voluntarily reproduced; this in fact is the



MEMOIRS
nature of "picturing." I expressed this thought earlier (in my 
Little Studies XLIX of 29th October 1898) in a different form:
   "To picture (in the sense of the soul-language) is the con- 
scious use of the human imagination for the purpose of pro- 
ducing pictures (predominantly pictures of recollections) in 
one's head, which can then be looked at by rays."" By vivid 
imagination I can produce pictures of all recollections from my 
life, of persons, animals and plants, of all sorts of objects in na- 
ture and objects of daily use, so that these images become visi- 
ble either inside my head or if I wish, outside, where I want 
them to be seen by my own nerves and by the rays. I can do the 
same with weather phenomena and other events,- I can for ex- 
ample let it rain or let lightning strike—this is a particularly 
effective form of "picturing," because the weather and particu- 
larly lightning are considered by the rays manifestations of the 
divine gift of miracles; I can also let a house go up in smoke



Continuation of the above . . .
under the window of my flat, etc. All this naturally only in my 
imagination, but in a manner that the rays get the impression 
that these objects and phenomena really exist. I can also "pic- 
ture" myself in a different place, for instance while playing the 
piano I see myself at the same time standing in front of a mir- 
ror in the adjoining room in female attire; when I am lying in 
bed at night I can give myself and the rays the impression that 
my body has female breasts and a female sexual organ; I men- 
tioned its great importance and the reason for it in Chapter 13. 
The picturing of female buttocks on my body—honi soil qui 
mal y pense—has become such a habit that I do it almost auto- 
matically whenever I bend down. "Picturing" in this sense 
may therefore be called a reversed miracle. In the same way as 
rays throw on to my nerves pictures they would like to see es- 
pecially in dreams, I too can in turn produce pictures for the 
rays which I want them to see.
   He who has not experienced what I have cannot form any 
idea in how many ways the ability to "picture" has become of 
value to me. It has truly often been a consolation and comfort 
in the unending monotony of my dreary life, in the mental tor- 
tures I suffered from the nonsensical twaddle of voices. What 
great joy to be able to picture again in my mind's eye recollec- 
tions of journeys and landscapes, sometimes—when the rays 
behave favorably—with such surprising faithfulness and true 
color that both myself and the rays have almost the exact im- 
pression of the landscapes I want to see again as if they were 
actually there.
   While writing these lines, I am attempting—by way of ex- 
periment—to make the shape of the Matterhorn appear on the 
horizon—at the point near Dittersbach from where the sum- 
mit rises so beautifully—and can convince myself that I suc- 
ceed up to a point with my eyes closed or open. Similarly I 
have innumerable times in the course of years seen shapes of 
people I knew enter my room or walk about in the garden.



MEMOIRS
"pictured"" them whenever I wanted to see them; or I gave shape 
to cartoons, which I had seen somewhere, particularly humor- 
ous ones from the Fliegenden Blattei, etc. In sleepless nights I 
often took revenge as it were for the rays' play-with-miracles, 
by conjuring up myself all sorts of shapes, serious or humor- 
ous, sensuously exciting or fearful, in my bedroom or in the 
cell; the entertainment I obtained in this way was an essential 
means to conquer the otherwise often unbearable boredom. I 
often accompany my piano-playing with the relevant "pictur- 
ing" particularly when I play piano arrangements. I can produce 
a whole opera or parts of it by "picturing" in my mind's eye 
the whole course of the action, the characters, the scenery, etc. 
—sometimes with surprising vividness. As I mostly have deal- 
ings with miracled birds, I sometimes enjoy myself by jokingly 
"picturing" for them how they would appear when being eaten 
up by a cat, etc. Naturally "picturing" in this sense requires 
considerable mental exertion, and my head must be in fairly 
good order and I in good spirits; when these conditions prevail 
I can derive quite considerable pleasure if the intended pictures 
succeed fairly accurately. Apart from mere entertainment, "pic- 
turing" has another significance hardly less important. Seeing 
pictures purifies rays^ as already mentioned in Chapter 11; 
they then enter into me without their usual destructive force. 
For this reason attempts are regularly made by counter- 
miracles to blot out what I have "pictured"; but I am usually 
victorious, and the pictures remain visible to me and the rays 
for as long as I exert my will, although admittedly they fre- 
quently become less distinct or paler. I have also to "picture" 
when I want to play the piano accurately, because miracles be- 
come less disturbing when I thus gain the goodwill of the rays.



Continuation of the above . . .
   Finally a not unimportant accompaniment of compulsive 
thinking is that all noises I hear, particularly those lasting 
some time (the rattling of railway trains, the rumbling of 
chain-steamers, the music of concerts, etc.), seem to speak the 
words which are talked into my head by the voices, and also 
those words in which I formulate my own thoughts.
   In contrast to the language of the sun and of the miracu- 
lously created birds this is only a subjective feeling: the sound 
of spoken or developing words is communicated to the audi- 
tory impressions which I simultaneously receive from rail- 
ways, chain-steamers, squeaking boots, etc.; it is far from me 
to assert that railways, chain-steamers, etc., really talk like 
the sun and the birds. This particularly disturbed the rays be- 
cause (as mentioned in Chapter 7, p. 90) in their previous 
abode in distant celestial regions, they were accustomed to the 
most holy peace; all noises must therefore frighten them. 
Hence such continually used phrases as "If only the cursed 
railways would cease to speak," "If only the cursed chain- 
steamers would cease to speak," etc. Such sentences of course 
made no practical difference whatever. Indeed the idea that 
one could stop a nuisance by simply expressing in words the 
wish for it to stop, seems to have been one of the peculiarities 
of the soul-character. For example: when miracles make my 
face hot or my feet cold, I am continually urged to say aloud: 
"If only the cursed heat would cease" or "If only my feet 
weren't so cold"; whereas as a practical human being I natu- 
rally prefer to wash my face with cold water instead or to 
warm my feet by rubbing them. Whether this peculiarity of 
the soul-character is a weakness must be answered guardedly: 
in the Order of the World souls existed only for enjoyment, 
not for practical action like human beings and other creatures 
of the earth. I am of course indifferent to the talking of rail- 
ways and other noises; but these gained importance because 
they became a weapon in my hand against the falsification of



MEMOIRS
my thoughts by the rays. By will power I can keep out, if only 
temporarily, all vibrations from outside. Thus "I am master of 
all noises" as the expression goes, which enables me to force 
certain forms of the not-thinking-of-anything-thought on to 
the rays while trains and chain-steamers pass, and so achieve 
temporary peace for my nerves.




God and the processes of 
creation; spontaneous 
generation; insects 
created by miracles. 
"Direction of gaze." 
System-of-examination
18
ALTHOUGH IN THE preceding chapters I have reported a 
good deal about divine miracles, it was all about damaging ef- 
fects on my body and the interferences they created in every- 
thing I did. Obviously these are signs of an abnormal state of 
affairs, which arose because the Order of the World itself was 
out of joint. To fight an individual human being and to work 
destruction on his body is not the rays' task, their essential 
purpose is to create. This essential function of rays, of God's 
miraculous creative power is still evident in many ways; I will 
therefore proceed to expound my opinions on the basis of ob- 
servations I made. I am aware that this is the most difficult 
subject ever to exercise the human mind, and I must anticipate 
that I can only make a few incomplete observations more in 
the nature of aphorisms. The essential secret of creation re- 
mains a closed book even for me; I have only an inkling which 
I will try to set out.
   As mentioned earlier (Chapter 1, footnote 11)1 believe that 
the essence of divine creation consists in a partial self-sacrifice



MEMOIRS
of rays which are sent down with the conscious will to create 
something in the outer world. God wills that something should 
be, and by dispatching rays with this will, what He wills im- 
mediately comes into existence. The Bible expresses this sig- 
nificantly in the words "God said. Let there be light: and there 
was light"; but to understand this fully is beyond human ca- 
pacity. Yet divine creative power seems to be not altogether 
boundless; it is somehow dependent on certain conditions con- 
nected mainly with the spatial relations to the celestial body 
on which creation was to take place, and therefore seems con- 
nected with drawing nearer to that body.
   In order to create a complete human being—an act of cre- 
ation which one must assume actually took place in the dim 
past—an extraordinary exertion of power was necessary, an 
exceptional approach to this celestial body; as a permanent 
state of affairs this was probably incompatible with the needs 
of the rest of the universe, perhaps even incompatible with the 
very existence of God Himself.
   What applies to man naturally applies also to all higher ani- 
mal life which was to be created next to already existing lower 
forms of animal life. One might therefore assume that all cre- 
ation on any one celestial body did not come into existence 
as Darwin postulated by new species developing through grad- 
ual evolution from earlier forms, but in a series of single acts 
of creation by which new species were each time created as 
models for other species, although possibly with some recol- 
lection of their earlier forms. Each species was perhaps only 
created in one or a few specimens endowed from the start with 
the capacity for reproduction; they could therefore in favorable 
conditions multiply to any number. Naturally, when a new 
species was created conditions had to exist which allowed that 
species to survive permanently; the physical conditions on the 
celestial body (temperature, air, water, etc.) must have reached 
a certain development and a population of plants and lower



God and the processes of creation . . .
animal forms had to be in existence to serve the higher species 
as nourishment. The crov\rning glory of the M^hole of creation, 
however, was the human being; the plan of creation was to 
form him in the image of God, as a being who after death is 
tiansfoimed again into God (compare Chapter 1, footnote 11).
   It is impossible for me to give a detailed scientific account 
of the cosmogenic theory which I have sketched roughly above 
as I lack almost all means to do so. I have no access to scien- 
tific sources; most of the time I lack the necessary conditions 
of health, because while I work my head is the continual 
object of distracting and damaging miracles which make con- 
centration impossible; lastly it would probably need a better 
intellect than mine to solve the gigantic task of proving the 
above conception scientifically.
   I will therefore confine myself to recounting the observa- 
tions which led me to this conception. My aim is to show the 
reader that he is not only dealing with the empty figments of a 
poor mental patient's fantasy—I am still considered as such 
among human beings—but with results which are the fruit of 
many years' hard thinking and based on experiences of a very 
special kind not known to other human beings. These may not 
contain the complete truth in all its aspects, but will be in- 
comparably nearer the truth than all that has been thought and 
written about the subject in the course of thousands of years.
   My most important observation is, that for years I have ex- 
perienced direct genesis (creation) through divine miracles cer- 
tainly on lower animals and I still experience it around me 
hourly. I have thus gained the certain conviction that sponta- 
neous generation (parentless generation, generatio aequivoca] 
does in fact exist; not, however, in the materialistic sense 
which in natural science is connected with these terms, in 
that inorganic substances can combine by chance with one an- 
other in such a manner that an organized (living) being results; 
here it is used in the totally different sense that the coming



MEMOIRS
into existence of such life is due to the purposeful manifesta- 
tions of divine power of will or divine power of creation. The 
animals thus created belong to different species according to 
the time of day or season; apart from spiders, the commonest 
are insects of all sorts, particularly flies, gnats, wasps, bees, 
bumble-bees, ants, earwigs, butterflies, night-moths, moths, 
etc., etc. These animals always appear on definite occasions 
and in definite order around me,- they appear so frequently that 
there is no doubt of their being each time newly created; they 
cannot possibly have existed before and only been driven into 
my company accidentally. For instance I can expect without 
fail, in fact I can predict, that as soon as I sit down on a bench 
in the garden and miracles close my eyes, which would in a 
short time lead to sleep through a union of all rays, a fly, wasp 
01 bumble-bee or a whole swarm of gnats appears to prevent 
me from sleeping. These miracles are mostly started by the 
lower God (Ariman); but I have the impression that these rela- 
tively harmless miracles have lately also been practiced by the 
upper God (Ormuzd); the reason, as mentioned earlier, is that 
even his hostile attitude towards me has greatly decreased 
since the steady increase of soul-voluptuousness.
   I have most stringent and convincing proofs of the fact that 
these beings do not fly towards me by accident, but are beings 
newly created for my sake each time. I am aware that it is diffi- 
cult to convince other people equally; but this is not my main 
purpose. At present I have not the slightest intention of making 
propaganda for my belief in miracles, nor for my ideas about di- 
vine matters; I am satisfied to relate my experiences and obser- 
vations in the certain hope that the overall picture of the 
miraculous phenomena which can be observed on my person 
and which probably will become more and more marked in 
the future, will lead other human beings of necessity to recog- 
nize their truth—even if only in years to come. One will prob- 
ably object that there is nothing very extraordinary in flies being



God and the processes of creation . . .
about the room or wasps about in the open at certain times, etc., 
and that only my morbid imagination makes me believe they are 
divine miracles somehow related to my own person. I will there- 
fore proceed to give some of the more important items which 
led me to the opposite opinion. As often as an insect of the 
mentioned species appears, a miracle simultaneously affects 
the diiection of my gaze-, I have not mentioned this miracle be 
fore but it has been regularly practiced for years. Rays after all 
continually want to see what pleases them, and these are fore- 
most either female beings, through which their sensation of 
voluptuousness is stimulated, or their own miracles, which 
give them the joy of having created something (compare what 
has been said about this in Chapter 1). My eye-muscles are there- 
fore influenced to move in a certain direction so that my glance 
must fall on things just created (or else on a female being).
   The objective reality of this event cannot be doubted after 
thousandfold repetition; why should I have the slightest wish 
to pay particular attention to any fly, wasp or butterfly, etc., 
which happens to appear around me. One will in any case not 
dispute that I must know myself whether my eyes are pulled 
towards an indifferent object or whether I look at something 
interesting around me of my own will.™ Added to this the 
voices that talk to me always make these phenomena the topic 
of a special conversation. This happens in two ways: either



MEMOIRS
one falsely imputes fears or wishes to my nerves, for instance, 
if only the cursed flies or wasps, etc., would stop, oi one uses 
such an occasion for examining me. This is because God (as 
mentioned in Chapter 13) cannot free Himself from the notion 
that the moment the not-thinking-of-anything occurs, that is 
if no ideas formulated in words emerge from my nerves, I am 
in a state of complete stupidity ("dementia"); but He always 
wishes to make quite certain whether this is so, and with it 
whether the hoped-for moment has really arrived in which a fi- 
nal withdrawal of rays is possible.
   The way this examination takes place is very peculiar and 
hardly understandable for anybody who knows human nature. 
People around me are made to say certain words by stimulat- 
ing their nerveS) for instance madmen throw in a certain learned 
term (possibly in a foreign language) which they perhaps re- 
member from the past; these come to my ears and simultane- 
ously the words "has been recorded" [scilicet into awareness 
or comprehension) are spoken into my nerves: for example a 
madman says without any connection "rationalism" or "social 
democracy" and the voices say "has been recorded," thereby 
attempting to find out whether the terms "rationalism" and 
"social democracy" still have a meaning for me, in other words 
whether I have enough reason left to comprehend these words.
   It is so obstinately held that I have become stupid to such a 
degree that day after day one doubts whether I still recognize 
people around me, whether I still understand ordinary natural 
phenomena, or articles of daily use or objects of art, indeed even



God and the processes of creation . . .
whether I still know who I am or have been. The phrase "has 
been recorded" with which I was examined, follows when my 
gaze has been directed towards certain things and I have seen 
them; they are then registered on my nerves with this phrase. 
For example when I saw the doctor my nerves immediately re- 
sounded with "has been recorded," or "the senior attendant— 
has been recorded," or, "a joint of pork—has been recorded," 
"railway—has been recorded" and especially the phrase "Senats- 
präsident—has been recorded," etc. And all this goes on in end- 
less repetition day after day, hour after hour. Incredibile scriptu 
I would like to add, and yet everything is really true, however 
difficult it must be for other people to reconcile themselves to 
the idea that God is totally incapable of judging a living human 
being correctly; even I myself became accustomed to this idea 
only gradually after innumerable observations.
   The system of examining me is similarly practiced in the case 
of the miraculously created insects. For instance, at the pres- 
ent season (early September) there are many butterflies about 
when I walk in the garden. Whenever a butterfly appears my 
gaze is first directed to it as to a being newly created that very 
moment, and secondly the word "butterfly—has been recorded" 
is spoken into my nerves by the voices; this shows that one 
thought I could possibly no longer recognize a butterfly and 
one therefore examines me to find out whether I still know the 
meaning of the word "butterfly."
   These observations will give the most sober reader the im- 
pression that remarkable things happen to me. One might of 
course doubt whether I can or will speak the truth, in other 
words whether I exaggerate or suffer from self-deception. But I 
may say—^whatever one may think of my mental faculties— 
that I can claim two qualities for myself without reservation, 
namely absolute truthfulness and more than usually keen 
powers of observation-, no one who knew me in my days of 
health or witnessed my behavior now would dispute this.



MEMOIRS
   With respect to the miraculously created lower animals (in- 
sects, etc.) I have already mentioned that there were certain 
differences according to season and time of day.
   Not even God Himself can create whatever He likes at all 
times. The measure of His creative power is dependent— 
according to season and time of day—on the relation which ex- 
ists between the sun and the earth; it seems to me that it is 
also dependent on the momentary condition of the weather. 
One must remember that, according to the ideas I discussed 
earlier (Chapter 1 and Chapter 7, footnote 44) the sun is not re- 
ally a power in itself and separate from God—in a certain sense 
she is even to be identified with God: in other words she is the 
instrument nearest to earth of God's power of miracles. God 
can only create within the spatial relations which He 
established between Himself and any celestial body and the 
resulting conditions of light and warmth. That is why butter- 
flies appear only in day-time, wasps, bees and bumble-bees 
mostly on warm days,- night-moths, gnats and moths in the 
evening when the glow of lamps also attracts them.
   Whether the same applies to (talking) birds which are cre- 
ated by miracle, and which I mentioned in Chapter 15, is ex- 
tremely difficult to say.'™ I have already mentioned in Chapter 
15 that the talking birds belong to whatever species of birds 
can be expected at a particular season. But there is one essen- 
tial difference: the talking birds contain remnants of previous 
human souls, but not so the insects created by miracle. The 
noise of the voices which speak into my head fuses with the 
noise of wasps or flies buzzing around me so that they appear 
to speak. This is certainly only a subjective feeling of the kind 
mentioned at the end of Chapter 17 in connection with the 
noises of trains, chain-steamers, etc. But I must mention an- 
other interesting detail about the miraculously created insects



God and the processes of creation . . .
which confirms that they are actually newly created beings: 
whether they are of a more or less molesting kind is directly 
dependent on whether God's attitude to me is friendly or not. 
God's attitude towards me in turn is dependent, as I have 
shown before, on the degree of soul-voluptuousness present in 
me at the time and on the distance to which He has with- 
drawn,- the farther He is removed and the smaller the degree of 
soul-voluptuousness, the more unfriendly His behavior to- 
wards me. The periods of friendly and unfriendly attitudes al- 
ternate rapidly in a single day. When God was unfriendly 
towards me earwigs, spiders, etc., appeared at night, and in 
day-time wasps, bumble-bees, etc.,- in other words nasty or mo- 
lesting animals which can even—by biting—cause pain; flies, 
moths, butterflies, etc., which caused me no unpleasantness 
whatsoever, appeared when God was friendly.
   In this connection I must finally mention the so-called 
frightening-miracle; this presumably was also a manifestation 
of God's miraculous creative power. The term frightening- 
miracle is not my own but originates from the voices,- it indi- 
cates the originally intended effect of these miracles; they have 
been practiced near me in many forms for years.
   In early years there sometimes appeared when I was in 
bed—not sleeping but awake—all sorts of large, queer, almost 
dragon-like shapes, immediately next to my bed, and almost as 
big as my bed; they were so close that I could almost have 
touched them with my hands. The "black bears" and the 
"white bears" mentioned in Chapter 6, which I saw repeatedly 
in Flechsig's Asylum, belonged probably to the same category 
of "frightening-miracle." Frightening-miracles have for years 
appeared quite suddenly very near me in the shape of dark 
shadows in day-time or at night when I am on the corridor, 
play the piano, etc. They still occur almost daily; at times 
they assume a human shape. I can even provoke the frighten- 
ing-miracle or something very like it: if I put my hand in front



MEMOIRS
of a white surface, perhaps the white-painted door of my room 
or the white glazing of the stove, I can see very peculiar distor- 
tions of shadows obviously caused by certain changes in the 
light rays of the sun. I am quite certain that these phenomena 
are not only my subjective sensations ("hallucinations" in 
the sense of Kraepelin's PSYCHIATRY, p. 110), as with every 
frightening-miracle my attention is particularly drawn to it 
by directing my gaze (turning my eyes). This happens particu- 
larly when I play the piano: left to my own free will my 
thoughts would certainly rest on the score in front of me or 
on the feelings aroused by the beauty of the music. But my 
eyes are turned quite suddenly so that my gaze is directed 
to a shadow created on the door or somewhere near me. I 
presume—naturally one can go no further than to presume— 
that the "frightening-miracles" are perhaps to be regarded as 
the very first beginnings of divine creation, which in certain 
circumstances could be further condensed to "fleeting-impro- 
vised-men" and from there lead up to the creation of real hu- 
man beings or other permanent beings. They of course lost 
their frightening effect on me as I grew accustomed to them 
with the years; nowadays they are only a nuisance when they 
suddenly divert my attention from what really interests me.
   In the next chapter I will discuss certain other aspects of 
God's nature and the essence of divine creation.




Continuation of the above.
God's omnipotence and 
man's freedom of will
19
IN THE PREVIOUS chapter I expressed my opinion that 
spontaneous generation (parentless generation) does actually 
occur; as proof I adduced my observations on the miraculously 
created insects. But I have to make some reservation to guard 
against misunderstanding. I can perhaps best express this 
reservation as follows: spontaneous generation occurs again on 
our earth since conditions contrary to the Order of the World 
have arisen; probably spontaneous generation has not occurred 
on our earth for thousands of years. "Spontaneous generation" 
is basically nothing other than a literal term for what I have 
called—in accordance with the language of the Bible and other 
religious sources—creation through divine miracles.
   The fundamental view I gained about God's relation to His 
creation is this: God exercised His power of miracles on our 
earth—as probably on any other celestial body which had 
reached the same degree of development—only until the ulti- 
mate aim of His creation was attained with the creation of the 
human being. From then on He left the created organic world



MEMOIRS
as it were to itself, and interfered directly by miracle only very 
rarely, if at all, in very exceptional cases (compare Chapter 1). 
In general He diverted His activity to other celestial bodies and 
to drawing up to Blessedness the souls of departed human be- 
ings; He Himself retired to an enormous distance.""
   I cannot be expected to furnish scientific proof of this fun- 
damental idea; I do not intend writing a scientific treatise on 
the history of the evolution of the universe. I only wish to re- 
late what I have experienced and learned, and draw a few legit- 
imate conclusions in the light of this knowledge. I expect 
confirmation of my fundamental idea mainly from my own 
personal fate and fortune as they will develop in the future; the 
time will come when other human beings will also have to 
recognize as a fact that my person has become the center of di- 
vine miracles. I would then have to leave to other people to 
elaborate scientifically the conclusions I have hinted at and 
perhaps to correct some details. I will now return to my theme.
   I assume that the whole work of creation on a celestial body 
consisted in a succession of single acts of creation, in general 
advancing from lower to higher forms of organic life. This idea 
is of course not new, indeed is common knowledge among 
those who have lately occupied themselves with the history 
of evolution. The point at issue is only whether to believe in



Continuation of the above . . .
blind accident as the cause of evolutionary development, which 
in some odd way leads to more perfect forms, or whether one 
must acknowledge an "intelligent cause" (God) v.-orking with 
a conscious will towards the development of higher and higher 
forms. That the development is goal-directed (du Prel) must 
be granted even by scientists otherwise inclined to attribute 
the "tenacity of deistic notions" to the lack of intellect of the 
majority of people. All that is recorded in my book has led 
me to the certain knowledge of the existence of a living God. 
This entitles me to examine the relation between God and His 
created world from a totally new point of view in the light of 
the supernatural impressions I received.
   As already mentioned in Chapter 1,1 know as little as other 
human beings whether the celestial bodies themselves (fixed 
stars, planets, etc.) were also created by God; I must therefore 
leave open whether the "Nebular Hypothesis" of Kant-Laplace 
is correct. With regard to the organic world it seems to me that 
one must make a fundamental distinction between the mode 
of creation of the plant world and of the animal world. One can 
of course assume that minimal parts of God's nerves (rays) were 
transformed through the act of creation into the shape of ani- 
mal souls which, however low, would still have the one 
quality of self-awazeness in common with divine rays. But it is 
incomprehensible, at least for human beings, that divine rays 
could enter into plants which, even if considered in a way as 
living, yet lack all self-awareness. One might assume that the 
plant world could have been created in certain favorable condi- 
tions by the mere reflection of rays which fall on to the earth 
with sunlight; perhaps God came nearer the earth while creat- 
ing an organized animal world, say on Venus. This might at the 
same time have resulted in calling a plant world to life on the 
earth, which was then less developed. But I must confess that 
I have received no divine intimation about this; if therefore I 
were to continue this discussion I might lose myself in fruitless



MEMOIRS
speculations in which any student of natural science might 
prove me wrong. I am on much safer ground when I assert that 
the capacity to transform themselves into animals of all kinds, 
ultimately even into a human being, is the latent potential of 
divine rays; they can create these creatures out of themselves.
   In this respect I command the most extraordinary experi- 
ences and observations. Above all I want to mention that the 
rays (nerves) of the upper God, when they are thrust down in 
consequence of my nerves' power of attraction, often appear in 
my head in the image of a human shape. I am by coincidence 
in the fortunate position to be able to point to a really existing 
picture instead of having to describe these things in words; this 
picture is surprisingly like the picture I often see in my head. It 
is the painting "Liebesreigen" by Pradilla contained in the 5th 
volume of MODERN ART (Berlin, published by Richard Bong); in 
the left hand upper corner of this picture a woman is seen, de- 
scending with arms stretched before her and folded hands. One 
has only to translate her into a male person to get a fairly accu- 
rate picture of what appears in my head when the nerves of the 
upper God come down. Head, chest and arms were distinct; 
the arms swung to one side, almost as if these nerves were try- 
ing to overcome an obstacle to their descent—the nerves of 
Flechsig's soul crowding the heavenly vault—see Chapter 8. 
The rays of the lower God (Ariman) also quite frequently cre- 
ate in my head the picture of a human face which (as soon as 
soul-voluptuousness is present) starts to smack its tongue, like 
human beings when eating something they like, or in other 
words, if they have the impression of sensual enjoyment.
   I must return here once again to the "little men" mentioned 
earlier (Chapters 6 and 11). I often observed that in certain con- 
ditions souls (rays) appeared as diminutive human shapes in my 
head or somewhere on my body; one must assume therefore that 
the capacity to be transformed into human shape or to become a 
human being, is an innate potentiality of divine rays. An entirely



Continuation of the above . . .
new light is thus shed on the well-known word of the Bible: "He 
created man in His image and in the image of God created He 
him." It appears that this passage from the Bible has to be under- 
stood literally, which no human being has so far dared to do.
   Presumably man was the highest God could create. All 
other created beings form only a long preparatory series with 
which God aimed at His ultimate goal: the creation of the hu- 
man being. It would of course have been absurd to create hu- 
man beings only, because human beings depend for their 
maintenance on many lower animal forms which serve as 
nourishment or for other purposes. The capacity to create the 
highest form, the human being, of necessity included the ca- 
pacity to create lower animal forms. Man could only be cre- 
ated when the soil was prepared for him. In the long series of 
animal forms created before him one can discern more and 
more the approximation to the structure of the human being.
   When God had created each single species His work of cre- 
ation with respect to that species had ended; when He created 
the human being the whole work of creation was accom- 
plished. Every single species was able to preserve itself by be- 
ing provided with the conditions under which it could live, by 
the capacity to reproduce and by the continued warmth of the 
sun. To what extent the various species and their individual 
members succeeded was dependent on their power of resist- 
ance and their individual abilities, but was no longer subject to 
direct intervention by God.
   I will add here a few remarks to those made previously 
(Chapter 13, footnote 81) about the relationship of God's 
omnipotence and omniscience to human freedom of will.'"



MEMOIRS
Mankind has always been occupied with the question whether 
God knows the future, and if He does, how this can be recon- 
ciled with the undoubted freedom of the human will. For a cor- 
rect perspective one has to remember that for God in a sense 
there is neither past nor future; foi Himself God has nothing to 
expect by way of fate or fortune from the future; He is at all 
times the same; this is implied in the notion of eternity. But 
put in a different way, the question whether God knows the fu- 
ture of the beings He has created—both species and individu- 
als—can best be answered with a few examples. I therefore 
raise the question: does divine omniscience exist with respect 
to the future in the sense that God knows in advance:
   (1)	To what age every single individual of the millions of 
living human beings will live?
   (2)	Whether and which flies will be caught by a spider in its 
web within a certain space of time?
   (3)	Which of the hundreds of thousands of numbers in a lot- 
tery will be the winner?
   (4)	What the terms will be of a possible peace to be con- 
cluded in the present war between Japan and the major Euro- 
pean powers against China?
   These examples, I believe, illustrate exactly the way in 
which for centuries scholastic philosophy of the Middle Ages 
treated predestination and related questions. Really one has 
only to raise these hypothetical questions to recognize that it 
would be absurd to answer them in the affirmative. All the ex- 
amples concern matters of the highest interest for an individ-



Continuation of the above . . .
ual or a nation, even vital questions,- yet for God they are all of 
them equally insignificant. God has provided for all the species 
He created (indirectly therefore also for the individuals belong- 
ing to them) the necessary conditions for self-preservation; it is 
left to these beings themselves whether they make good use of 
them and succeed; God therefore cannot possibly know in ad- 
vance.'" This of course does not exclude that God bestowed a 
special interest on the higher forms of life He had created, par- 
ticularly on the preservation of the human race as a whole, or 
single human individuals. He could thus, in suitable cases and 
very exceptionally, even subsequently intervene directly by 
miracle.
   Everything I have said so far in this chapter refers to condi- 
tions in consonance with the Order of the World. But through 
my case fundamental changes have come about in these condi- 
tions, the significance of which not even I can fully assess. As 
God was forced to draw nearer the earth again and remain per- 
manently relatively close to it—perhaps neglecting at the same 
time other celestial bodies and certainly thereby suspending 
the founding of new states of Blessedness—the earth has once 
again become the permanent scene of divine miracles. It seems 
impossible for rays to remain in a state of absolute inactivity;



MEMOIRS
to create (to produce by miracle) is after all their nature. As for 
the time being in any case, they could not possibly fulfill the 
tasks which were theirs within the Order of the World, the 
power of miracles was diverted, indeed became a purposeless 
demonstration of power achieving nothing.
   Miracles are directed in the first place against my person 
and against all objects I use; miracles affect the behavior of all 
human beings around me, rays influence their nerves to speak, 
to cough, to sneeze, even to pass wind and to relieve them- 
selves, etc., and all other natural functions; miracles also affect 
all living animals around me; even the neighing of horses, the 
barking of dogs, etc., is produced by influencing their nerves. 
Finally miracles are used to create anew lower animals (in- 
sects, etc., as mentioned in the last chapter); all to no purpose 
whatsoever, as living animals and human beings can do these 
things anyhow, and the newly created insects belong to a 
species which in any case already exists in vast numbers, so 
that there is no need to call them into life afresh.
   The enactment of miracles therefore amounts as far as they 
concern me to a useless torment, as far as they concern other 
people and animals to a senseless game. Even for God Himself 
this situation is—as stated before—fraught with certain evils. 
His joy over newly created things can last only a short time 
and soon gives way to states of anxiety; this is evident from 
the nerves, separated from the totality of God's nerves by my 
power of attraction, coming down to me with cries of "help." 
Whether and how it will be possible to bring these conditions, 
so unpleasant for all parties, back again into their normal 
channels and into consonance with the Order of the World, I 
can only speculate about; but I will add a few more relevant 
considerations at the end of the book.




Egocentricity of the rays 
regarding my person. 
Further developments of 
personal affairs
20
I WISH TO add another point in connection with God's 
inability to understand the living human being as an organism 
and to judge his thinking correctly, which has in many ways 
become important to me. I can put this point briefly: every- 
thing that happens is in reference to me. Writing this sen- 
tence, I am fully aware that other people may be tempted to 
think that I am pathologically conceited; I know very well that 
this very tendency to relate everything to oneself, to bring 
everything that happens into connection with one's own per- 
son, is a common phenomenon among mental patients. But 
in my case the very reverse obtains. Since God entered into 
nerve-contact with me exclusively, I became in a way for God 
the only human being, or simply the human being around 
whom everything turns, to whom everything that happens 
must be related and who therefore, from his own point of view, 
must also relate all things to himself.
   This completely absurd conception, which was at first 
naturally incomprehensible to me but which I was forced to



MEMOIRS
acknowledge as a fact through years of experience, becomes ap- 
parent at every opportunity and occasion. For instance, when I 
read a book or a newspaper, one thinks that the ideas in them are 
my own; when I play a song or an opera arrangement for the pi- 
ano, one thinks that the text of the song or opera expresses my 
own feelings. It is the same naive ignorance which is found 
among uneducated people who visit the theater, namely the idea 
that what the actors speak actually renders their own feelings 
or indeed that the actors themselves are the persons acted. Of 
course it is only amusing when, for instance, while I am play- 
ing the aria from "The Magic Flute" "Oh I feel it, it has van- 
ished, gone for ever, love's delight," or "The vengeance of hell 
boils in my heart, death and despair flame around me," I hear 
voices in my head which presume that from now on I have re- 
ally lost all happiness for ever, or that I am actually in the grip 
of despair, etc. One must not underestimate how my patience 
has been tried for years through having to listen to the most 
terrible rubbish which consists of throwing in questions: 
"Why don't you say it (aloud)?" and "Has been recorded." It is 
so nonsensical, that for a long time I was in doubt whether 
God Himself could be responsible, or whether it was attributa- 
ble to some lower soul-less creatures created on distant planets 
in the fashion of the "fleeting-improvised-men," thence to be 
employed for the writing-down and the questioning business.
   I have often discussed the reasons for and against this idea 
in my "Little Studies," where anybody interested can read de- 
tails. I am inclined to believe, without finally committing 
myself, that it is the distant God Himself who causes the non- 
sensical questioning business, and that He is ruled by the same 
error which underlies it.'" This ignorance of human nature and 
of the human mind is really no greater here than in the other



Egocentricity of the rays . . .
phenomena, in which I must assume that God Himself has a 
hand, e.g. in the matter of evacuation, to express myself briefly 
(see end of Chapter 16); in the assumption that to think noth- 
ing is identical with dementia, and in taking the nerve-language 
as the real language of human beings (Chapter 13), etc., etc.
   That God cannot claim infallibility since He entered into a 
relationship with me which is contrary to the Order of the 
World, is proved to my satisfaction, as He Himself must have 
determined the whole policy pursued against me, and thus 
have started the systems of writing-down, not-flnishing-a- 
sentence, tying-to-celestial-bodies, etc. But this policy aims at 
the impossible. Yet for a full year I was concerned for my rea- 
son, being then still totally ignorant of the effects of the mira- 
cles and the terrors they caused beyond all human experience. 
In the last five years, however, I have come to realize that the 
Order of the World does not provide even God with the means 
to destroy a human being's reason. Nevertheless, even now God 
allows Himself to be led by the opposite policy, which amounts 
to possibly "forsaking me"; in pursuit of this policy He contin- 
ually starts new systems and gives me proof of it day after day. 
Even now He cannot rid Himself of these faulty notions. But I 
must emphasize again that I do not think that this is in any 
way irreconcilable with belief in God's eternal wisdom in that 
sphere of action which is allotted to Him within the Order of 
the World.
   It is demanded of me to relate to myself everything that 
happens or is spoken by human beings, particularly during my 
regular walks in the garden of the Asylum. Hence my stay in 
the Asylum's garden has always been very troublesome, and 
led in previous years to scenes of violence between myself and 
other patients. Soul-voluptuousness has for long been so strong



MEMOIRS
in my body that a union of all rays can be expected at any mo- 
ment, and so the necessary conditions for sleep fulfilled; for 
years therefore I could not sit quietly on a bench for as long as 
two minutes, where I would have fallen asleep—particularly if 
tired after a more or less sleepless night—without the so-called 
"interferences" starting (compare Chapter 10), which enable 
the rays to withdraw. Sometimes these "interferences" are 
practiced in the harmless fashion of insects being produced by 
miracle (as described in Chapter 18); sometimes in other ways, 
by patients of the Asylum starting to talk to me or making 
some other noise near me. There can be no doubt that this is 
due to the nerves of the human being concerned being stimu- 
lated by miracles, because each time it happens (Chapter 7 and 
Chapter 15) I simultaneously feel a more or less painful blow 
on my head.
   Because the patients'" consist mostly of madmen of low edu- 
cation and rough humor, vulgar words are usually uttered, which 
the rays wanted me also to relate to myself. Sometimes they 
even caused me to be actually attacked, without any exchange 
of words, as for instance by a certain Dr. D. while I was quietly 
playing chess with another patient. I always tried, whenever 
possible, to ignore the insults hurled at me as coming from 
madmen. But ignoring these things has its limits; when the lu- 
natics come too close to me or continue their insulting behav- 
ior without paying any regard to the contempt I show them by 
my silence, nothing remains for me but to answer back in the 
same manner, if I want to avoid showing myself up as a cow- 
ard. But as on such occasions one word often leads to another, it 
used to end in actual scenes of violence in which, incidentally, 
I always had the satisfaction of knocking my attacker to the 
ground—despite violent miracles being simultaneously enacted 
against my knee-cap to make fighting impossible for me.



Egocentricity of the rays . . .
   For some years I have luckily been able to avoid open 
blows, nevertheless even now every walk in the garden calls 
for a tremendous exertion of tact and moderation on my part if 
real scenes of scandal are to be avoided. For even now the 
method of setting the lunatics on me with insulting forms of 
speech continues, and at the same time the stupid twaddle 
of the voices "Has been recorded," "Why don't you say it 
(aloud?)," "Because I am stupid," or even "Because I am 
afraid," etc., tells me that it is still God's purpose that I relate 
these insulting forms of speech to myself.
   For years therefore I made it my habit to take my chess- 
board into the garden on afternoon strolls and spend at least 
the greater part of the time playing chess, so as to maintain 
peace and order if possible and at the same time to offer God 
persistent proof that my reason was intact. I even carried this 
through for short periods during the winter in the most bitter 
cold, when I had to play chess standing up; while I play chess 
there is a certain amount of peace. I am exposed to the same 
nuisances even in my room, where the whole time—in the 
form of so-called "interferences"—other patients come in for 
no purpose; the connection of all this with supernatural mat- 
ters is beyond dispute.
   All these events together with other considerations made 
me decide about a year ago to work for my discharge from this 
Asylum within measurable time. I really belong among edu- 
cated people, not among madmen; as soon as I move among 
educated people, as for instance at the table of the Director of 
this Asylum, where I have taken meals since Easter 1900, 
many of the evils caused by miracles fade away, particularly 
the bouts of so-called bellowing, because during such times I 
have the opportunity by taking part in an open conversation to 
prove to God that my mental powers are undiminished. 
Although I have a nervous illness, I do not suffer in any way 
from a mental illness which would make me incapable of



MEMOIRS
looking after my own affairs (§ 6, B.-G.-B. for Germany) or 
which would allow my detention in an institution against my 
will on the grounds of administrative law.107
   When I therefore learnt some years ago that I had been 
placed under temporary tutelage as early as 1895,1 approached 
the authorities last autumn |1899) demanding a decision as to 
whether the temporary tutelage was to be made permanent or 
whether it could be rescinded. Contrary to my expectations, a 
formal order for my tutelage was made in March 1900 by the 
District Court Dresden, based on a medical expert's report from 
this Asylum and a court hearing of January of that year. Because 
I considered the grounds for the decision unsubstantiated I 
brought an action in accordance with procedure against the 
Prosecuting Authority, to have my placing under tutelage re- 
scinded. The decision of the Court, the Country Court Dresden, 
is still outstanding, but can be expected in the course of this 
year. There is no need to give details of the case up to now, be- 
cause the files of the District and Country Court Dresden con- 
tain complete records, should wider circles become interested 
in my case. They also touch on my religious views.
   Almost imperceptibly the threads of this chapter have led 
me back from considerations about the nature of God to my 
own affairs. I want therefore to add a few more remarks about 
them. The circumstances of my outward life have lately changed 
markedly for the better, I would like to say have become 
more worthy of human dignity, particularly my treatment by 
the authorities of the Asylum; perhaps not least because my 
written works showed that after all in my case one may be



Egocentricity of the rays . . .
dealing with manifestations which lie outside the field of 
usual scientific experience. My bodily state is difficult to de- 
scribe; usually there is a very rapid change between high-grade 
bodily well-being and all sorts of more or less painful and dis- 
agreeable states. The feeling of bodily well-being rests upon 
soul-voluptuousness which is at times highly developed and 
so strong that especially when I am in bed, it requires only a 
little exertion of my imagination to attain such sensuous 
pleasure as gives a pretty definite foretaste of female sexual en- 
joyment in intercourse.
   I will come back to this point in greater detail in the 
next chapter. On the other hand as a result of the miracles 
practiced against me all manner of painful states occur alter- 
nately (namely whenever God withdraws again), almost with- 
out exception quite suddenly and vanishing equally regularly 
after a short time. Besides the ones I have mentioned I also 
suffered from sciatica, cramp in the calves, states of paralysis, 
sudden attacks of hunger, and suchlike,- earlier on lumbago 
and toothache were frequent. Sometimes the lumbago was 
so painful (while I was still sleeping in the padded room), that 
I could only lift myself from the bed with simultaneous 
cries of pain—^half voluntarily uttered; the toothache was 
also at times so severe that it made every mental activity 
impossible. Even now I suffer from almost uninterrupted 
headaches of a kind certainly unknown to other human 
beings, and hardly comparable to ordinary headaches. They 
are tearing and pulling pains and are caused by the attempt of 
rays, tied-to-celestial-bodies, to withdraw from me when soul- 
voluptuousness has become very strong. The bellowing- 
miracle usually occurs at the same time and causes, when it 
is often repeated, a very unpleasant concussion of the head; 
if it occurs while I am eating I must be very careful not to spit 
out what I have in my mouth. This rapid change in my condi- 
tion gives the overall impression of madness and my whole life



MEMOIRS
therefore carries this stamp, the more so as my surroundings 
are made up mostly of madmen who themselves add to all 
sorts of mad things happening.
   I can rarely remain long at any one occupation; headaches 
come on when I read for any time, write or do something simi- 
lar, and make a change of occupation necessary. I am therefore 
frequently forced to fill my time with trifles; I then feel physi- 
cally at my best (apart from playing the piano). I have had to 
keep myself busy in the past years with menial jobs, such as 
sticking things together, filling in pictures with paints, and 
suchlike; particularly helpful for my bodily well-being are 
those jobs which count as feminine occupations, for instance 
sewing, dusting, making beds, washing up, and so on. Even 
now there are days when apart from playing the piano I can oc- 
cupy myself only with such trifles, that is to say when the 
state of my head precludes a more fitting occupation requiring 
mental effort. My sleep is on the whole very much better than 
before; I have already mentioned that sometimes I cannot re- 
main in bed because of persistent states of bellowing (which al- 
ternate with high-grade sensuous pleasure). Even this year I 
have several times been forced to leave my bed from midnight 
or 1 a.m. onwards, and sit up until the morning by artificial 
lighting (which has now been provided), or in the height of 
summer without; in about a third of all nights this was neces- 
sary from 3 or 4 a.m. onwards. My sleep is often disturbed by 
dreams; from their tendentious content ("being retained on the 
side of men" in contrast to cultivating "feminine feelings") I 
can frequently recognize the influence of the rays. But rarely 
do dreams now have the character of visions, i.e. the peculiar 
vividness of impressions.
   The talk of the voices I hear changes continually, it varied 
even during the short time while I was writing this book. Few 
of the previously used phrases are heard now, and hardly ever 
those referring to the "not-thinking-of-anything-thought." The



Egocentricity of the rays . . .
talk of the voices has slowed down even more since my 
description of it in Chapter 16, so that it is almost nothing 
more than a hissing in my head; I could hardly distinguish 
individual words, if—I must say unfortunately—I did not al- 
ways know in advance from experience what senseless phrases 
to expect.
   I think it likely that changes of the kind described, which 
are all connected with increased soul-voluptuousness, will 
continue; and for the same reason the miracles enacted against 
me will in the future also change further. Most troublesome 
now are the states of bellowing—next to an occasional bad 
head—by which I have been visited for two or three years, and 
which have in the last year been an almost unbearable plague. 
Whether one can expect them to improve in the future I dare 
not prophesy; but if I could take up residence outside this 
Asylum I believe, for reasons given earlier, that these things 
would improve.
241



Blessedness and voluptuousness in their mutual relation.
Consequences of this relation for personal behavior
 
SO FAR I have hardly attempted to adduce factual proof of 
the reality of the miracles which I assert happened, nor of the 
truth of my religious ideas. Quite apart from the frequently 
mentioned states of bellowing,'" a great deal of proof is pro- 
vided by the condition of my body, which on examination 
shows recognizable feminine characteristics convincing to 
everybody. I will therefore use this chapter to discuss this sub- 
ject particularly; I will preface it with the information, partly 
in excerpt, partly in full, which I sent earlier to the Directors 
of this Asylum.
   Since the District Court of Dresden decreed on the 13th



Blessedness and voluptuousness . .
March 1900 that I was to be placed under tutelage, I sent a 
note on the 24th of the same month to the Directors of this 
Asylum in which I set out some of the more important points 
on the basis of which I was going to contest this decision, as 
in fact I have since done. I stated as my reasons that in any 
future proceedings the Director of the Asylum would be 
asked for a further expert report about me, and that it was 
therefore important to acquaint him with my own opinion 
about the nature of my illness, so as to draw his attention to 
certain points before the report was made. From my note of 
24th March 1900 the following passage is relevant:
"It is of course far from my purpose to wish to convince 
other people by means of a reasoned argument of the 
truth of my so-called 'delusions' and 'hallucinations.' I 
am fully aware that at the present moment this would 
be possible only to a very limited extent. Whether in 
days to come a transformation of my body altogether be- 
yond the sphere of human experience, will not in itself 
furnish proof, the future alone can decide. There is only 
one point I wish to explain now:
that I would at all times be prepared to submit my 
body to medical examination for ascertaining 
whether my assertion is correct, that my whole 
body is filled with nerves of voluptuousness from 
the top of my head to the soles of my feet, such as 
is the case only in the adult female body, whereas 
in the case of a man, as far as I know, nerves of 
voluptuousness are only found in and immedi- 
ately around the sexual organs.
   Should such an examination confirm that I am cor- 
rect in what I assert, and should medical science thus be



MEMOIRS
forced to admit that such phenomena on a male body 
cannot be explained in a natural human way, then the 
'delusion' of my body being to a large extent subject to 
the influence of divine miracles must appear in a very 
different light even to a wider circle of people."
   I followed this first note with a second on 26th March, 
which I render in its original form:
As a sequel to my representation of 24th March, I beg to 
ask a favor of the Director of the Asylum. That note ex- 
plains why the development on my body of nerves of 
voluptuousness is of central importance to me both in 
regard to my religious ideas and as the main issue on 
which I intend to contest the order of the District Court 
placing me under tutelage.
   It would therefore be of great interest to me to obtain 
information on the following points:
   (1| Does the science of neurology acknowledge the 
existence of special nerves whose function it is to con- 
duct the sensation of voluptuousness (nerves of volup- 
tuousness or sensory nerves—an expression I heard 
Professor Weber use the other day—or whatever the sci- 
entific term may be)?
   (2) Is it correct, as I maintain, that such nerves of 
voluptuousness exist over the whole female body 
whereas in the male in the sexual organs and their prox- 
imity only; do I therefore mention a fact known to neu- 
rology or would it be regarded as erroneous in the 
present state of that science?
   I would be most grateful for an explanation either in 
writing or perhaps by the loan of a book dealing with



Blessedness and voluptuousness . .
neurology in a scientific manner, from which I could 
make the necessary excerpts myself.
Your humble servant, 
Signed.
I followed this up with a third note on 30th March as follows:
Following my note of 26th March to the Director of the 
Asylum concerning the nerves of voluptuousness. 
Professor Weber was kind enough last night to grant me 
an interview and to lend me two books from the medical 
library. I now return once again to the aforementioned 
questions, not for the sake of my personal interest alone, 
but also because I consider that the transformations ob- 
servable on my body may possibly lead to new scientific 
insights in this field.
   If I understood Professor Weber correctly, the science 
of neurology does not recognize the existence of special 
nerves as carriers of sensuous pleasure; he also contra- 
dicted the view that such nerves are palpable from out- 
side, as little as nerves in general. On the other hand he 
did not dispute the fact that the feeling of sensual pleas- 
ure—whatever its physiological basis—occurs in the fe- 
male to a higher degree than in the male, involves the 
whole body, and that the mammae particularly play a 
very large part in the perception of sensuous pleasure. 
This fact can in my opinion only be explained in that 
some organs (whether they be called tendons or nerves 
or anything else] cover the whole female body more ex- 
tensively than the male body. For myself I am subjec- 
tively certain that my body—as I have repeatedly stated 
in consequence of divine miracles—shows such organs 
to an extent as only occurs in the female body. When I



MEMOIRS
exert light pressure with my hand on any part of my 
body I can feel certain string or cord-like structures 
under the skin; these are particularly marked on my 
chest where the woman's bosom is, here they have the 
peculiarity that one can feel them ending in nodular 
thickenings. Through pressure on one such structure I 
can produce a feeling of female sensuous pleasure, par- 
ticularly if I think of something feminine. I do this, by 
the way, not for sensual lust, but I am absolutely com- 
pelled to do so if I want to achieve sleep or protect myself 
against otherwise almost unbearable pain.
   I felt exactly the same string or cord-like structures 
on my sister-in-law's arm during a visit (after my atten- 
tion had been drawn to this point) and I presume there- 
fore that they are present on every female body in the 
same way.
   I also believe I am justified in thinking that these 
structures give the female skin its peculiar softness, 
which is also unusually noticeable on my body.
   I have to add that the female characteristics which 
are developing on my body show a certain periodicity at 
increasingly shorter intervals. The reason is that every- 
thing feminine attracts God's nerves. Hence as often as 
one wishes to withdraw from me, one attempts to make 
the female characteristics which are evident on my body 
recede by miracle,- the effect is that the structures which 
I call "nerves of voluptuousness" are pushed a little 
under the surface, that is to say are not so distinctly 
palpable on the skin, my bosom becomes a little flatter, 
etc. But when after a short time the rays have to ap- 
proach again, the "nerves of voluptuousness" (to retain 
this term) become more marked, my bosom bulges 
again, etc. Such changes occur at present in as short a pe- 
riod as a few minutes.



Blessedness and voluptuousness . ,
   The Director of the Asylum can hardly doubt that 
with these expositions I am pursuing not only my per- 
sonal interests but also those of science; in uncovering 
these things which are in my opinion connected with 
supernatural matters, I trust I have not laid myself open 
to the reproach of having touched upon issues of which 
as a man I have to be ashamed.
Your obedient servant.
Signed.
   I want to add a few further remarks to the above.
   Of course I do not doubt that the information Professor 
Weber gave me during his conversation with me, which I men- 
tioned in my note of 30th March, is really representative of the 
present state of knowledge in the science of neurology. Never- 
theless, I cannot forego expressing my conviction, with the hu- 
mility a layman should show in such matters, that the string 
or cord-like structures described above, observable on my body, 
are in fact nerves, so that specific nerves of voluptuousness do 
exist, serving specifically to conduct the sensation of volup- 
tuousness. The proof lies for me in the fact that these struc- 
tures, as I know definitely, are by origin nothing but erstwhile 
nerves of God, which can hardly have lost their qualities as 
nerves through having entered my body; proof is also that I can 
provoke the actual sensation of voluptuousness at any mo- 
ment by gentle pressure on these structures. I may be excused 
therefore for retaining the term nerves of voluptuousness.
   For more than six years now my body has been filled with 
these nerves of voluptuousness through the continuous influx 
of rays or God's nerves. It is therefore hardly surprising 
that my body is filled through and through with nerves of 
voluptuousness to an extent which cannot be surpassed even 
by a female being. The outward appearances show a regular



MEMOIRS
periodicity, as already mentioned in my note of 30th March, 
according to whether God has withdrawn to a greater distance 
—if thoughts are lacking which the rays must find in me—or 
has been forced to draw nearer to me.
   When the rays approach, my breast gives the impression of 
a pretty well-developed female bosom,- this phenomenon can 
be seen by anybody who wants to observe me with his own 
eyes. I am therefore in a position to offer objective evidence 
by observation of my body. A brief glance however would not 
suffice, the observer would have to go to the trouble of spend- 
ing 10 or 15 minutes near me. In that way anybody would 
notice the periodic swelling and diminution of my bosom. 
Naturally hairs remain under my arms and on my chest; these 
are by the way sparse in my case,- my nipples also remain 
small as in the male sex. Notwithstanding, I venture to assert 
flatly that anybody who sees me standing in front of a mirror 
with the upper part of my body naked would get the un- 
doubted impression of a female trunk—especially when the 
illusion is strengthened by some feminine adornments. I will 
not hesitate to add, that once I am outside this Asylum, I 
would grant an opportunity for observing my body to any 
serious specialist whose motive is scientific interest and not 
mere curiosity; I myself would however not instigate such an 
examination. If similar phenomena have never previously been 
observed on a male body, as I maintain, I believe I have thus 
furnished proof which must arouse serious doubt among seri- 
ous men as to whether what has so far been attributed to hallu- 
cinations and delusions is not after all reality, and therefore 
my whole belief in their miraculous nature and my explana- 
tion of the phenomena on my person and on my body not also 
founded on truth.
   I consider it my right and in a certain sense my duty to cul- 
tivate feminine feelings which I am enabled to do by the pres- 
ence of nerves of voluptuousness. In order not to lose through



Blessedness and voluptuousness . .
such a confession the respect of other people whose opinion I 
value, I shall have to enter into further detail.
   Few people have been brought up according to such strict 
moral principles as I, and have throughout life practiced such 
moderation especially in matters of sex, as I venture to claim 
for myself. Mere low sensuousness can therefore not be con- 
sidered a motive in my case; were satisfaction of my manly 
pride still possible, I would naturally much prefer it; nor would 
I ever betray any sexual lust in contact with other people. But 
as soon as I am alone with God, if I may so express myself, I 
must continually or at least at certain times, strive to give di- 
vine rays the impression of a woman in the height of sexual de- 
light; to achieve this I have to employ all possible means, and 
have to strain all my intellectual powers and foremost my 
imagination.
   I have frequently referred in this book to the close relation- 
ship which exists between voluptuousness and everlasting 
Blessedness. Voluptuousness can be considered as part of ever- 
lasting Blessedness and is in a sense inherent in man and other 
living beings. In this light Schiller's "Ode to Joy" is almost vi- 
sionary and reminiscent of divine inspiration: "Voluptuous- 
ness is given even to the worm, but it's the Cherub who stands 
before God." Nevertheless there is an essential difference. 
Voluptuous enjoyment or Blessedness is granted to souls in 
perpetuity and as an end in itself, but to human beings and 
other living creatures solely as a means for the preservation of 
the species. Herein lie the moral limitations of voluptuousness 
for human beings. An excess of voluptuousness would render 
man unfit to fulfill his other obligations; it would prevent him 
from ever rising to higher mental and moral perfection; indeed 
experience teaches that not only single individuals but also 
whole nations have perished through voluptuous excesses. For 
me such moral limits to voluptuousness no longer exist, in- 
deed in a certain sense the reverse applies. In order not to be



MEMOIRS
misunderstood, I must point out that when I speak of my duty 
to cultivate voluptuousness, I never mean any sexual desires 
towards other human beings (females) least of all sexual in- 
tercourse, but that I have to imagine myself as man and 
woman in one person having intercourse with myself, or 
somehow have to achieve with myself a certain sexual excite- 
ment, etc.—which perhaps under other circumstances might 
be considered immoral—^but which has nothing whatever to do 
with any idea of masturbation or anything like it.
   This behavior has been forced on me through God having 
placed Himself into a relationship with me which is contrary 
to the Order of the World; although it may sound paradoxical, 
it is justifiable to apply the saying of the Crusaders in the First 
Crusade to myself: Dieu le veut (God wishes it|. God is insepa- 
rably tied to my person through my nerves' power of attraction 
which for some time past has become inescapable; there is 
no possibility of God freeing Himself from my nerves for the 
rest of my life—although His policy is aimed at this—except 
perhaps in case my unmanning were to become a fact. On the 
other hand God demands constant enjoyment, as the normal 
mode of existence for souls within the Order of the World. It is 
my duty to provide Him with it in the form of highly devel- 
oped soul-voluptuousness, as far as this is possible in the 
circumstances contrary to the Order of the World. If I can get 
a little sensuous pleasure in this process, I feel I am entitled 
to it as a small compensation for the excess of suffering and 
privation that has been mine for many years past; it also af- 
fords some small recompense for the manifold painful trials 
and tribulations which I have to suffer even now, particularly 
when soul-voluptuousness diminishes. I know that I do not 
offend against any moral duty, but am merely doing what 
sense dictates in these irregular circumstances; for the effect 
on the relationship to my wife, see my remarks in Chapter 13, 
footnote 76.
r -|
250



Blessedness and voluptuousness . .
   It is naturally impossible for me to spend the whole day or 
even the greater part of it with voluptuous ideas or to direct 
my imagination to them. It would be beyond human nature to 
do this; human beings are not born only for voluptuous pleas- 
ure, and therefore mere voluptuousness as the sole purpose of 
life would be as unnatural for me as anyone else. On the other 
hand, continual thinking, uninterrupted activity of the nerves 
of intellect without any respite, such as the rays impose on me 
through compulsive thinking, is equally incompatible with 
human nature. The art of conducting my life in the mad posi- 
tion I find myself—and I do not mean here the relationship 
with my environment but the absurd relation between God 
and myself which is contrary to the Order of the World— 
consists in finding a fitting middle course in which both par- 
ties, God and man, fare best; in other words, if divine rays find 
soul-voluptuousness in my body which they can share—which 
alone makes entering my body acceptable to them—while I 
retain the necessary rest for my nerves of intellect, particularly 
at night, and the capacity to occupy myself in a manner com- 
mensurate with my intellectual needs.
   This cannot be achieved without some unpleasantness for 
both sides, both being forced to behave in a manner really con- 
trary to their nature. Soul-voluptuousness is not always pres- 
ent in full measure but periodically recedes, partly because God 
takes withdrawal action, partly because I cannot constantly 
cultivate voluptuousness. Yet every mental activity as well as 
indulging in man's natural right of thinking nothing (particu- 
larly when out walking) is always accompanied by a consider- 
able decrease in bodily well-being. To find necessary rest from 
intellectual activity particularly sleep at night, also in day-time 
for instance after the main meal and in the early morning on 
awakening, I feel I am entitled to make my physical condition 
bearable even to the extent of obtaining a feeling of sensuous 
well-being by cultivating voluptuousness in the above sense.




MEMOIRS
   The experience of years has confirmed me in this view; 
indeed I believe that God would never attempt to withdraw 
(which always impairs my bodily well-being considerably) but 
would follow my attraction without resistance permanently 
and uninterruptedly, if only I could always be playing the 
woman's part in sexual embrace with myself, always rest my 
gaze on female beings, always look at female pictures, etc.
   I also wish to mention that the lower God (Ariman) in fact 
confirmed this, when some time ago he recommended a cer- 
tain mode of behavior in a number of phrases incorporated in 
the writing-down-system and spoken by the rays. Particularly 
such sentences as "voluptuousness has become God-fearing" 
and "excite yourself sexually" were often heard from the voices 
emanating from the lower God. Clearly the usual ideas of 
morality have been reversed in my relation to God. Voluptuous- 
ness is permissible for human beings if sanctified in the bond 
of marriage it serves the purpose of reproduction; but in itself 
it never counted for much. In my relation to God, however, 
voluptuousness has become "God-fearing," that is to say it is 
the likeliest satisfactory solution for the clash of interests aris- 
ing out of circumstances contrary to the Order of the World.
   As soon as I allow a pause in my thinking without devoting 
myself to the cultivation of voluptuousness—which is of course 
unavoidable as nobody can either think all the time or always 
cultivate voluptuousness—the following unpleasant conse- 
quences mentioned earlier occur: attacks of bellowing and bod- 
ily pain; vulgar noises from the madmen around me, and cries 
of "help" from God. Mere common sense therefore commands 
that as far as humanly possible I fill every pause in my think- 
ing—in other words the periods of rest from intellectual activ- 
ity—with the cultivation of voluptuousness.
r252

